{"title":"‘Dangerous nonsense’: AI-authored books about ADHD for sale on Amazon","content":"Amazon is selling books marketed at people seeking techniques to manage their ADHD that claim to offer expert advice yet appear to be authored by a chatbot such as ChatGPT.\n\nAmazon’s marketplace has been deluged with works produced by artificial intelligence that are easy and cheap to publish but include unhelpful or dangerous misinformation, such as shoddy travel guidebooks and mushroom foraging books that encourage risky tasting.\n\nA number of books have appeared on the online retailer’s site offering guides to ADHD that also seem to be written by chatbots. The titles include Navigating ADHD in Men: Thriving with a Late Diagnosis, Men with Adult ADHD: Highly Effective Techniques for Mastering Focus, Time Management and Overcoming Anxiety and Men with Adult ADHD Diet & Fitness.\n\nSamples from eight books were examined for the Guardian by Originality.ai, a US company that detects content produced by artificial intelligence. The company said each had a rating of 100% on its AI detection score, meaning its systems were highly confident that the books were written by a chatbot.\n\nExperts said online marketplaces were a “wild west” owing to the lack of regulation around AI-produced work – and dangerous misinformation risked spreading as a result.\n\nMichael Cook, a computer science researcher at King’s College London, said generative AI systems were known to give dangerous advice, for example around ingesting toxic substances, mixing together dangerous chemicals or ignoring health guidelines.\n\nAs such, it was “frustrating and depressing to see AI-authored books increasingly popping up on digital marketplaces” particularly on health and medical topics, which could result in misdiagnosis or worsen conditions, he said.\n\n“Generative AI systems like ChatGPT may have been trained on a lot of medical textbooks and articles, but they’ve also been trained on pseudoscience, conspiracy theories and fiction,” said Cook.\n\n“They also can’t be relied on to critically analyse or reliably reproduce the knowledge they’ve previously read – it’s not as simple as having the AI ‘remember’ things that they’ve seen in their training data. Generative AI systems should not be allowed to deal with sensitive or dangerous topics without the oversight of an expert,” he added.\n\nYet Cook noted Amazon’s business model incentivised this type of practice, as it made “money every time” people bought a book, whether the work was “trustworthy or not”, while the generative AI companies that created the products were not held accountable.\n\nProf Shannon Vallor, the director of the University of Edinburgh’s Centre for Technomoral Futures, said Amazon had “an ethical responsibility to not knowingly facilitate harm to their customers and to society”, although it would be “absurd” to make a bookseller responsible for the contents of all its books.\n\nProblems were arising because the guardrails previously deployed in the publishing industry – such as reputational concerns and the vetting of authors and manuscripts – had been completely transformed by AI, she noted.\n\nThis was compounded by a “wild west” regulatory environment in which there were no “meaningful consequences for those who enable harms”, fuelling a “race to the bottom”, Vallor said.\n\nAt present, there is no legislation that requires AI-authored books to be labelled as such. Copyright law only applies if a specific author’s content has been reproduced, although Vallor noted that tort law should impose “basic duties of care and due diligence”.\n\nThe Advertising Standards Agency said AI-authored books cannot be advertised to give a misleading impression that they were written by a human, enabling people who had seen such books to submit a complaint.\n\nRichard Wordsworth was hoping to learn about his recent adult ADHD diagnosis when his father recommended a book he found on Amazon after searching “ADHD adult men”.\n\nWhen Wordsworth sat down to read it, “immediately, it sounded strange”, he said. The book opened with a quote from the conservative psychologist Jordan Petersen and then contained a string of random anecdotes, as well as historical inaccuracies.\n\nSome advice was actively harmful, Wordsworth observed. For example, one chapter discussing emotional dysregulation warned that friends and family did not “forgive the emotional damage you inflict. The pain and hurt caused by impulsive anger leave lasting scars.”\n\nWhen Wordsworth researched the author he spotted a headshot that looked AI-generated, plus a lack of qualifications. He searched several other titles in the Amazon marketplace and was shocked to encounter warnings that his condition was “catastrophic” and that he was “four times more likely to die significantly earlier”.\n\nHow an embarrassing U-turn exposed a concerning truth about ChatGPT | Chris Stokel-Walker\nRead more\n\nHe felt immediately “upset”, as did his father, who is highly educated. “If he can be taken in by this type of book, anyone could be – and so well-meaning and desperate people have their heads filled with dangerous nonsense by profiteering scam artists while Amazon takes its cut,” Wordsworth said.\n\nAn Amazon spokesperson said: “We have content guidelines governing which books can be listed for sale and we have proactive and reactive methods that help us detect content that violates our guidelines, whether AI-generated or not. We invest significant time and resources to ensure our guidelines are followed and remove books that do not adhere to those guidelines.\n\n“We continue to enhance our protections against non-compliant content and our process and guidelines will keep evolving as we see changes in publishing.”\n\nExplore more on these topics\nArtificial intelligence (AI)\nAmazon\nE-commerce\nInternet\nAttention deficit hyperactivity disorder\nMental health\nHealth\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/may/04/dangerous-nonsense-ai-authored-books-about-adhd-for-sale-on-amazon","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:09:16.942Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"As Musk steps back, experts say Doge cuts have harmed government services","content":"As Elon Musk steps back from his role heading the so-called “department of government efficiency” (Doge), many experts on government operations complain that Doge has done nothing to improve the quality of services the government provides to the American people.\n\n“Doge is not offering any solid claims that it has improved services in any way,” said Donald Moynihan, a professor of public policy at the University of Michigan. “Rather, it has made the quality of some government services worse.”\n\nMusk, the world’s richest man, was appointed to run the government efficiency drive by Donald Trump in January and as a “special government employee” was barred from working for more than 180 days for the administration. He also has his own business woes to attend to.\n\nMass resignations at labor department threaten workers in US and overseas, warn staff – as more cuts loom\nRead more\n\nBut on his way out of the White House, Musk has boasted that Doge has achieved $150bn in savings, although many budget experts question the accuracy of that figure. Musk has repeatedly made exaggerated and erroneous claims about savings, which are a fraction of Musk’s goal of $1tn in cuts.\n\nMoynihan and other public policy experts said it was unfortunate that Musk and Doge took the hard-charging focus of profit-maximizing business executives – of aggressively seeking to cut jobs and payroll – instead of adopting a broader focus aimed at making government more efficient while improving services.\n\nMartha Gimbel, the executive director of the Yale Budget Lab, said Musk evidently has little interest in making services better. “They were the ‘department of government slash and burn’,” Gimbel said. “There doesn’t seem to be an approach to dig in on places where government services could really be improved. Any improvement in government services takes time. You have to invest. You have to build it out. You have to figure out how to fix it.”\n\nThere has clearly been a degeneration of government services\nMartha Gimbel of the Yale Budget Lab\n\nAsked whether Musk and Doge had improved any government services, Gimbel burst out in laughter. “No,” she said. “There has clearly been a degeneration of government services.”\n\nPublic policy experts and members of the public have pointed to numerous ways that government services have deteriorated due to Doge’s cuts. There have been longer waiting times to get appointments at veterans’ hospitals, longer waits when people call the Internal Revenue Service, longer lines at social security offices. The departure of many highly experienced social security employees has led to workers with far less training giving advice on benefits.\n\nAt a White House news conference on 1 May, Musk defended Doge’s accomplishments. “In the grand scheme of things, I think we’ve been effective. Not as effective as I’d like. I think we could be more effective,” Musk said. “But we’ve made progress.”\n\nFederal workers in limbo amid whiplash White House firings and court-ordered rehirings\nRead more\n\nMusk acknowledged that his $1tn goal had been far harder to reach than he had anticipated. “It’s sort of, how much pain is the cabinet and the Congress willing to take?” he said. “It can be done, but it requires dealing with a lot of complaints.”\n\nThe White House did not respond to the Guardian’s questions about the deterioration of some government services or to the Guardian’s request for any examples of how Doge has improved services.\n\nGimbel said that Americans don’t realize that many government services will get worse in coming months as the tens of thousands of Doge-ordered job cuts play out. “Things will definitely get worse,” she said. For instance, the administration has far to go in carrying out its plan to cut 80,000 employees in the Department of Veterans Affairs.\n\nWhile many public policy experts say Trump and Musk wildly exaggerate in their claims that there is huge waste, fraud and abuse in government, Gimbel said there is of course waste in government. “There is waste, and you can go after it,” she said. “People who have been in government know where those places are. There is a ton of tech that needs modernizing. Doge doesn’t seem interested in that. There’s a lot of Medicare and Medicaid overbilling. Doge doesn’t seem interested in that either. What you have is a relatively expensive exercise in slash-and-burn that sometime in the future will cost a lot to fix.”\n\nIt’s hard to offer any rational basis for the decisions that are being made. There certainly aren’t any improvements that the American public will see\nMax Stier of the Partnership for Public Service\n\nMax Stier, the president of the Partnership for Public Service, a non-profit research group, said that many business executives – including Jack Welch, the former General Electric CEO famed for cost-cutting and increasing profits – would be unhappy with Musk’s quick and brutal cuts. Stier complained that Musk and his team of twentysomething tech whizzes made steep cuts while knowing little about an agency’s operations or about the qualifications and responsibilities of the people they fired or pushed out.\n\nskip past newsletter promotion\n\nSign up to This Week in Trumpland\n\nFree newsletter\n\nA deep dive into the policies, controversies and oddities surrounding the Trump administration\n\nEnter your email address\nSign up\nPrivacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.\n\nafter newsletter promotion\n\n“Jack Welch would be appalled by the approach that Doge has taken,” Stier said. “It’s not actually about cost-cutting. It’s about capability destroyed. Jack Welch would never, ever have fired people without having a real understanding about the way the organization worked and about the qualities of people who were being fired. This is an arbitrary exercise that has moved out employees who are often by far the most qualified rather than the least qualified.”\n\nStier noted that Trump has described Doge as an exercise in cost-cutting and organizational improvement. “That’s just not the case,” Stier said. “It’s hard to offer any rational basis for the decisions that are being made. There certainly aren’t any improvements that the American public will see.”\n\n“It’s burning down government capability,” he continued. “It’s unquestionably clear that they are firing people willy-nilly and are disrupting government services without any understanding of the consequences or concern about the consequences. It’s a break-it-is-to-fix-it mentality. It isn’t a mentality that predominates in Silicon Valley. It’s sheer reckless behavior in the public sector because real people get hurt.”\n\nMusk’s claim of $150bn in savings is a vast overestimate because it fails to include the considerable costs of Doge’s moves, said Stier. Stier’s group estimates that as a result of firings, rehirings, severance pay, paid leave and lost productivity involving more than 100,000 workers, Doge’s maneuvers will cost taxpayers $135bn this fiscal year. And several public policy experts said the increased wait times and hassles the public will face due to Doge’s cuts should also be subtracted from the $150bn.\n\nMoynihan said Musk has precisely the wrong vision for someone tasked with making government more efficient. “His vision is that there is no way that government employees can produce anything of value,” Moynihan said. “So the idea of tools that makes government services better is completely alien to the Musk mindset.\n\n“I think he believes that nothing public employees do has any real value, that they are not capable employees and therefore cutting them will do no harm,” Moynihan added. “It’s a vision that doesn’t understand what public services are, why they exist and how they benefit people.”\n\nMoynihan faulted Musk for gutting one of the government’s main efforts to use technology to improve services and efficiency. He also criticized Musk for helping kill Direct File, a free and user-friendly way for people to report and file their taxes.\n\nMove fast and destroy things: 100 chaotic days of Elon Musk in the White House\nRead more\n\nLiz Shuler, the president of the AFL-CIO, the main US union federation, said Doge’s cuts will hurt workers. She pointed to the sharp cuts at the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, saying that that agency, for instance, does important research to ensure that firefighters’ personal protective equipment is safe as possible.\n\n“There’s this notion that Doge is just cutting line items on a spreadsheet. It’s hurting real lives and real people,” Shuler said. “They’ve treated federal workers with blatant disregard and have been nothing short of dehumanizing and insulting toward them.”\n\nGimbel of the Yale Budget Lab warned of another downside to Doge’s cuts. “Part of what government does is mitigate risk,” she said. “Take food safety. Government inspectors decrease the risk that you will get listeria or salmonella. But when they reduce the number of food inspectors, will you get listeria or salmonella tomorrow? No. Will it probably increase the chances of people getting listeria and salmonella over the next five years? Yes.”\n\nExplore more on these topics\nElon Musk\nTrump administration\nDonald Trump\nUS politics\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/may/05/elon-musk-doge-federal-government","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:09:19.514Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"‘Dangerous nonsense’: AI-authored books about ADHD for sale on Amazon","content":"Amazon is selling books marketed at people seeking techniques to manage their ADHD that claim to offer expert advice yet appear to be authored by a chatbot such as ChatGPT.\n\nAmazon’s marketplace has been deluged with works produced by artificial intelligence that are easy and cheap to publish but include unhelpful or dangerous misinformation, such as shoddy travel guidebooks and mushroom foraging books that encourage risky tasting.\n\nA number of books have appeared on the online retailer’s site offering guides to ADHD that also seem to be written by chatbots. The titles include Navigating ADHD in Men: Thriving with a Late Diagnosis, Men with Adult ADHD: Highly Effective Techniques for Mastering Focus, Time Management and Overcoming Anxiety and Men with Adult ADHD Diet & Fitness.\n\nSamples from eight books were examined for the Guardian by Originality.ai, a US company that detects content produced by artificial intelligence. The company said each had a rating of 100% on its AI detection score, meaning its systems were highly confident that the books were written by a chatbot.\n\nExperts said online marketplaces were a “wild west” owing to the lack of regulation around AI-produced work – and dangerous misinformation risked spreading as a result.\n\nMichael Cook, a computer science researcher at King’s College London, said generative AI systems were known to give dangerous advice, for example around ingesting toxic substances, mixing together dangerous chemicals or ignoring health guidelines.\n\nAs such, it was “frustrating and depressing to see AI-authored books increasingly popping up on digital marketplaces” particularly on health and medical topics, which could result in misdiagnosis or worsen conditions, he said.\n\n“Generative AI systems like ChatGPT may have been trained on a lot of medical textbooks and articles, but they’ve also been trained on pseudoscience, conspiracy theories and fiction,” said Cook.\n\n“They also can’t be relied on to critically analyse or reliably reproduce the knowledge they’ve previously read – it’s not as simple as having the AI ‘remember’ things that they’ve seen in their training data. Generative AI systems should not be allowed to deal with sensitive or dangerous topics without the oversight of an expert,” he added.\n\nYet Cook noted Amazon’s business model incentivised this type of practice, as it made “money every time” people bought a book, whether the work was “trustworthy or not”, while the generative AI companies that created the products were not held accountable.\n\nProf Shannon Vallor, the director of the University of Edinburgh’s Centre for Technomoral Futures, said Amazon had “an ethical responsibility to not knowingly facilitate harm to their customers and to society”, although it would be “absurd” to make a bookseller responsible for the contents of all its books.\n\nProblems were arising because the guardrails previously deployed in the publishing industry – such as reputational concerns and the vetting of authors and manuscripts – had been completely transformed by AI, she noted.\n\nThis was compounded by a “wild west” regulatory environment in which there were no “meaningful consequences for those who enable harms”, fuelling a “race to the bottom”, Vallor said.\n\nAt present, there is no legislation that requires AI-authored books to be labelled as such. Copyright law only applies if a specific author’s content has been reproduced, although Vallor noted that tort law should impose “basic duties of care and due diligence”.\n\nThe Advertising Standards Agency said AI-authored books cannot be advertised to give a misleading impression that they were written by a human, enabling people who had seen such books to submit a complaint.\n\nRichard Wordsworth was hoping to learn about his recent adult ADHD diagnosis when his father recommended a book he found on Amazon after searching “ADHD adult men”.\n\nWhen Wordsworth sat down to read it, “immediately, it sounded strange”, he said. The book opened with a quote from the conservative psychologist Jordan Petersen and then contained a string of random anecdotes, as well as historical inaccuracies.\n\nSome advice was actively harmful, Wordsworth observed. For example, one chapter discussing emotional dysregulation warned that friends and family did not “forgive the emotional damage you inflict. The pain and hurt caused by impulsive anger leave lasting scars.”\n\nWhen Wordsworth researched the author he spotted a headshot that looked AI-generated, plus a lack of qualifications. He searched several other titles in the Amazon marketplace and was shocked to encounter warnings that his condition was “catastrophic” and that he was “four times more likely to die significantly earlier”.\n\nHow an embarrassing U-turn exposed a concerning truth about ChatGPT\nChris Stokel-Walker\nRead more\n\nHe felt immediately “upset”, as did his father, who is highly educated. “If he can be taken in by this type of book, anyone could be – and so well-meaning and desperate people have their heads filled with dangerous nonsense by profiteering scam artists while Amazon takes its cut,” Wordsworth said.\n\nAn Amazon spokesperson said: “We have content guidelines governing which books can be listed for sale and we have proactive and reactive methods that help us detect content that violates our guidelines, whether AI-generated or not. We invest significant time and resources to ensure our guidelines are followed and remove books that do not adhere to those guidelines.\n\n“We continue to enhance our protections against non-compliant content and our process and guidelines will keep evolving as we see changes in publishing.”\n\nExplore more on these topics\nArtificial intelligence (AI)\nAmazon\nE-commerce\nInternet\nAttention deficit hyperactivity disorder\nMental health\nHealth\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/may/04/dangerous-nonsense-ai-authored-books-about-adhd-for-sale-on-amazon","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:09:39.844Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"As Musk steps back, experts say Doge cuts have harmed government services","content":"As Elon Musk steps back from his role heading the so-called “department of government efficiency” (Doge), many experts on government operations complain that Doge has done nothing to improve the quality of services the government provides to the American people.\n\n“Doge is not offering any solid claims that it has improved services in any way,” said Donald Moynihan, a professor of public policy at the University of Michigan. “Rather, it has made the quality of some government services worse.”\n\nMusk, the world’s richest man, was appointed to run the government efficiency drive by Donald Trump in January and as a “special government employee” was barred from working for more than 180 days for the administration. He also has his own business woes to attend to.\n\nMass resignations at labor department threaten workers in US and overseas, warn staff – as more cuts loom\nRead more\n\nBut on his way out of the White House, Musk has boasted that Doge has achieved $150bn in savings, although many budget experts question the accuracy of that figure. Musk has repeatedly made exaggerated and erroneous claims about savings, which are a fraction of Musk’s goal of $1tn in cuts.\n\nMoynihan and other public policy experts said it was unfortunate that Musk and Doge took the hard-charging focus of profit-maximizing business executives – of aggressively seeking to cut jobs and payroll – instead of adopting a broader focus aimed at making government more efficient while improving services.\n\nMartha Gimbel, the executive director of the Yale Budget Lab, said Musk evidently has little interest in making services better. “They were the ‘department of government slash and burn’,” Gimbel said. “There doesn’t seem to be an approach to dig in on places where government services could really be improved. Any improvement in government services takes time. You have to invest. You have to build it out. You have to figure out how to fix it.”\n\nThere has clearly been a degeneration of government services\nMartha Gimbel of the Yale Budget Lab\n\nAsked whether Musk and Doge had improved any government services, Gimbel burst out in laughter. “No,” she said. “There has clearly been a degeneration of government services.”\n\nPublic policy experts and members of the public have pointed to numerous ways that government services have deteriorated due to Doge’s cuts. There have been longer waiting times to get appointments at veterans’ hospitals, longer waits when people call the Internal Revenue Service, longer lines at social security offices. The departure of many highly experienced social security employees has led to workers with far less training giving advice on benefits.\n\nAt a White House news conference on 1 May, Musk defended Doge’s accomplishments. “In the grand scheme of things, I think we’ve been effective. Not as effective as I’d like. I think we could be more effective,” Musk said. “But we’ve made progress.”\n\nFederal workers in limbo amid whiplash White House firings and court-ordered rehirings\nRead more\n\nMusk acknowledged that his $1tn goal had been far harder to reach than he had anticipated. “It’s sort of, how much pain is the cabinet and the Congress willing to take?” he said. “It can be done, but it requires dealing with a lot of complaints.”\n\nThe White House did not respond to the Guardian’s questions about the deterioration of some government services or to the Guardian’s request for any examples of how Doge has improved services.\n\nGimbel said that Americans don’t realize that many government services will get worse in coming months as the tens of thousands of Doge-ordered job cuts play out. “Things will definitely get worse,” she said. For instance, the administration has far to go in carrying out its plan to cut 80,000 employees in the Department of Veterans Affairs.\n\nWhile many public policy experts say Trump and Musk wildly exaggerate in their claims that there is huge waste, fraud and abuse in government, Gimbel said there is of course waste in government. “There is waste, and you can go after it,” she said. “People who have been in government know where those places are. There is a ton of tech that needs modernizing. Doge doesn’t seem interested in that. There’s a lot of Medicare and Medicaid overbilling. Doge doesn’t seem interested in that either. What you have is a relatively expensive exercise in slash-and-burn that sometime in the future will cost a lot to fix.”\n\nIt’s hard to offer any rational basis for the decisions that are being made. There certainly aren’t any improvements that the American public will see\nMax Stier of the Partnership for Public Service\n\nMax Stier, the president of the Partnership for Public Service, a non-profit research group, said that many business executives – including Jack Welch, the former General Electric CEO famed for cost-cutting and increasing profits – would be unhappy with Musk’s quick and brutal cuts. Stier complained that Musk and his team of twentysomething tech whizzes made steep cuts while knowing little about an agency’s operations or about the qualifications and responsibilities of the people they fired or pushed out.\n\nskip past newsletter promotion\n\nSign up to This Week in Trumpland\n\nFree newsletter\n\nA deep dive into the policies, controversies and oddities surrounding the Trump administration\n\nEnter your email address\nSign up\nPrivacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.\n\nafter newsletter promotion\n\n“Jack Welch would be appalled by the approach that Doge has taken,” Stier said. “It’s not actually about cost-cutting. It’s about capability destroyed. Jack Welch would never, ever have fired people without having a real understanding about the way the organization worked and about the qualities of people who were being fired. This is an arbitrary exercise that has moved out employees who are often by far the most qualified rather than the least qualified.”\n\nStier noted that Trump has described Doge as an exercise in cost-cutting and organizational improvement. “That’s just not the case,” Stier said. “It’s hard to offer any rational basis for the decisions that are being made. There certainly aren’t any improvements that the American public will see.”\n\n“It’s burning down government capability,” he continued. “It’s unquestionably clear that they are firing people willy-nilly and are disrupting government services without any understanding of the consequences or concern about the consequences. It’s a break-it-is-to-fix-it mentality. It isn’t a mentality that predominates in Silicon Valley. It’s sheer reckless behavior in the public sector because real people get hurt.”\n\nMusk’s claim of $150bn in savings is a vast overestimate because it fails to include the considerable costs of Doge’s moves, said Stier. Stier’s group estimates that as a result of firings, rehirings, severance pay, paid leave and lost productivity involving more than 100,000 workers, Doge’s maneuvers will cost taxpayers $135bn this fiscal year. And several public policy experts said the increased wait times and hassles the public will face due to Doge’s cuts should also be subtracted from the $150bn.\n\nMoynihan said Musk has precisely the wrong vision for someone tasked with making government more efficient. “His vision is that there is no way that government employees can produce anything of value,” Moynihan said. “So the idea of tools that makes government services better is completely alien to the Musk mindset.\n\n“I think he believes that nothing public employees do has any real value, that they are not capable employees and therefore cutting them will do no harm,” Moynihan added. “It’s a vision that doesn’t understand what public services are, why they exist and how they benefit people.”\n\nMoynihan faulted Musk for gutting one of the government’s main efforts to use technology to improve services and efficiency. He also criticized Musk for helping kill Direct File, a free and user-friendly way for people to report and file their taxes.\n\nMove fast and destroy things: 100 chaotic days of Elon Musk in the White House\nRead more\n\nLiz Shuler, the president of the AFL-CIO, the main US union federation, said Doge’s cuts will hurt workers. She pointed to the sharp cuts at the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, saying that that agency, for instance, does important research to ensure that firefighters’ personal protective equipment is safe as possible.\n\n“There’s this notion that Doge is just cutting line items on a spreadsheet. It’s hurting real lives and real people,” Shuler said. “They’ve treated federal workers with blatant disregard and have been nothing short of dehumanizing and insulting toward them.”\n\nGimbel of the Yale Budget Lab warned of another downside to Doge’s cuts. “Part of what government does is mitigate risk,” she said. “Take food safety. Government inspectors decrease the risk that you will get listeria or salmonella. But when they reduce the number of food inspectors, will you get listeria or salmonella tomorrow? No. Will it probably increase the chances of people getting listeria and salmonella over the next five years? Yes.”\n\nExplore more on these topics\nElon Musk\nTrump administration\nDonald Trump\nUS politics\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/may/05/elon-musk-doge-federal-government","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:09:41.857Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Better at everything: how AI could make human beings irrelevant","content":"R\night now, most big AI labs have a team figuring out ways that rogue AIs might escape supervision, or secretly collude with each other against humans. But there’s a more mundane way we could lose control of civilisation: we might simply become obsolete. This wouldn’t require any hidden plots – if AI and robotics keep improving, it’s what happens by default.\n\nHow so? Well, AI developers are firmly on track to build better replacements for humans in almost every role we play: not just economically as workers and decision-makers, but culturally as artists and creators, and even socially as friends and romantic companions. What place will humans have when AI can do everything we do, only better?\n\nTalk of AI’s current abilities can occasionally sound like marketing hype, and some of it definitely is. But in the longer term, the scope for improvement is huge. You may believe that there will always be something uniquely human that AI just can’t replicate. I’ve spent 20 years in AI research, watching its progression from basic reasoning to solving complex scientific problems. Abilities that seemed uniquely human, such as handling ambiguity or using abstract analogies, are now easily handled. There may be delays along the way, but we should assume there will be continued progress in AI across the board.\n\nThese artificial minds won’t just aid humans – they’ll quietly take over in countless small ways, initially because they’re cheaper, eventually because they’re genuinely better than even our best performers. Once they’re reliable enough, they’ll become the only responsible choice for almost all important tasks, ranging from legal rulings and financial planning to healthcare decisions.\n\nIt will be hard to justify spending twice as much for a human therapist, lawyer, or teacher who’s only half as good\n\nIt’s easiest to imagine what this future may look like in the context of employment: you’ll hear of friends losing jobs and having trouble finding new work. Companies will freeze hiring in anticipation of next year’s better AI workers. More and more of your own job will consist of accepting suggestions from reliable, charming and eager-to-please AI assistants. You’ll be free to think about the bigger picture, but will find yourself conversing about it with your ultra-knowledgable AI assistant. This assistant will fill in the blanks in your plans, provide relevant figures and precedent, and suggest improvements. Eventually, you’ll simply ask it: “What do you think I should do next?” Whether or not you lose your job, it’ll be clear that your input is optional.\n\nAnd it won’t be any different outside the world of work. It was a surprise even to some AI researchers that the first models capable of general reasoning abilities, the precursors to ChatGPT and Claude, could also be tactful, patient, nuanced and gracious. But it’s now clear that social skills can be learned by machines just like any other. People already have AI romantic companions, and AI doctors are consistently rated better on bedside manner than human doctors.\n\nWhat will life look like when each of us has access to an endless supply of personalised affection, guidance and support? Your family and friends will be even more glued to their screens than usual. When they do talk to you, they’ll tell you about funny and impressive things their online companions have said.\n\nMaybe you’ll be put off by others’ preference for their new companions – in that case you might end up asking your daily AI assistant for advice. This reliable counsellor will tactfully talk you through any problems you face, and help you practice having difficult conversations with family members. After these relatively tiring interactions, the participants might unwind by talking to their respective AI confidantes. Perhaps we’ll agree that something had been lost in this shift to virtual companions, even as we start to find raw human contact ever more grating and tedious in comparison.\n\nSo far, so dystopian. But couldn’t we simply choose not to use AI this way, preferring human advisers and human-made goods and services? The problem is, it might be hard to even notice AI replacement in many domains – and the parts that we do notice will mostly seem like major improvements. Even today, AI-generated content is increasingly indistinguishable from human-created work. It will be hard to justify spending twice as much for a human therapist, lawyer or teacher who’s only half as good. Organisations that choose slow, expensive humans will be outcompeted by those who choose fast, cheap, reliable AI.\n\nCan’t we rely on governments to address these issues as they arise? Unfortunately, they too will have the same incentives to lean on AI. Politicians and civil servants will also ask their virtual assistants: “What should I do?”, and will find involving humans in decision-making to be a recipe for delay, misunderstanding and bickering.\n\nPolitical theorists sometimes talk about the “resource curse”, where countries with abundant natural resources end up more autocratic and corrupt – Saudi Arabia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are good examples. The idea is that valuable resources make the state less dependent on its citizens. This, in turn, makes it tempting (and easy) for the state to sideline citizens altogether. The same could happen with the effectively limitless “natural resource” of AI. Why bother investing in education and healthcare when human capital provides worse returns?\n\nThe most disturbing possibility is that this might all seem perfectly reasonable to us\n\nOnce AI can replace everything that citizens do, there won’t be much pressure for governments to take care of their populations. The brutal truth is that democratic rights arose partly due to economic and military necessity, and to ensure stability. But those won’t count for much when governments are funded by taxes on AIs instead of citizens, and when they too start replacing human employees with AIs, all in the name of quality and efficiency. Even last resorts such as labour strikes or civil unrest will gradually become ineffective against fleets of autonomous police drones and automated surveillance.\n\nThe most disturbing possibility is that this might all seem perfectly reasonable to us. The same AI companions that hundreds of thousands of people are already falling for in their current primitive state will be making ultra-persuasive, charming, sophisticated and funny arguments for why our diminishing relevance is actually progress. AI rights will be presented as the next big civil rights cause. The “humanity first” camp will be painted as being on the wrong side of history.\n\nEventually, with no one having planned or chosen it, we might all find ourselves struggling to hold on to money, influence, even relevance. This new world could be more friendly and humane in many ways, while it lasts: AIs would handle annoying tasks and provide radically better goods and services such as medicine and entertainment. But humans would be a drag on growth, and if our democratic rights started to slip, we’d be powerless to protect them.\n\nSurely the developers of these technologies have a better plan? Alarmingly, the answer is no. Both Dario Amodei, CEO of Anthropic, and Sam Altman, CEO of Open AI, agree we’ll need to completely reorganise our economic system once human labour isn’t competitive. But no one has a clear idea of what that would look like. Those who do acknowledge the possibility of radical change are mostly working on more immediate threats from misuse or secret collusion by AIs. And while some economists such as the Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz have sounded the alarm that AI could drive human wages to zero, many seem unwilling to consider that it could ever be anything other than a complement to human labour.\n\nW\nhat can we do to avoid our gradual disempowerment? The first step is to talk about it. Journalists, academics and other thinkers have been strangely silent on this massive topic. I personally find it hard to think clearly about. It sounds weak and humiliating to say: “I’m scared of the future because I won’t be able to compete.” It sounds insulting to say: “You should be worried because you’ll be irrelevant.” And it sounds defeatist to say: “Your children may inherit a world that doesn’t have a place for them.” It’s understandable that people short-circuit to dismissals like “Surely I’ll always have a special advantage?” or “Who am I to stand in the way of progress?”\n\nOne obvious idea is to not build general-purpose AI at all. While slowing down its development is probably feasible, trying to stop it globally for long may require near-totalitarian monitoring and control, or worldwide coordination to dismantle large parts of the computer chip manufacturing industry. A major danger with this path is that governments may ban private AI development but still develop it for military and policing purposes, delaying our obsolescence but disempowering us long beforehand.\n\nIf we start seeing signs of a crisis, we need to be able to step in and at least slow things down,\n\nIf we can’t stop AI development, there are at least four things that would still help. First, we should try to track AI use and influence throughout our economy and in government. We need to know where AI is displacing human economic activity, and especially if it starts being used at scale for things such as lobbying and propaganda. Anthropic’s recent Economic Index is a first attempt at this, but there’s a lot more to be done.\n\nSecond, we’ll need at least some oversight and regulation of frontier AI labs and deployments to stop the technology from accruing too much influence while we’re still figuring out what’s going on. Currently, we rely on voluntary efforts, and have no ability to coordinate to stop autonomous AI from commanding substantial resources or gathering power. If we start seeing signs of a crisis, we need to be able to step in and slow things down, especially in cases where individuals and groups benefit from things that harm society overall.\n\nThird, we can use AI to strengthen people’s ability to organise and advocate for themselves. AI-supported forecasting, oversight, planning and negotiation offer the possibility of designing and implementing more trustworthy institutions, if we can build them while we still have influence. For instance, conditional prediction markets and AI-supported forecasts could make it clearer where the world is heading under different policies, helping settle questions such as “If this policy is made law, how will the average human wage change three years from now?” Experimentation with AI-supported democratic mechanisms will let us prototype more responsive governance models that will be needed for a faster-changing world.\n\nFinally, if we want to build powerful AI without being marginalised, we have the gargantuan task of learning how to steer our civilisation, instead of just letting political systems evolve according to whatever pressures they happen to face. This bumbling-through has been sort of OK until now, because humans were needed no matter what. Without this safeguard, we will be adrift unless we understand all the ways in which power, competition and growth operate. The technical field of “AI alignment” – concerned with making sure machines share our goals – needs to broaden its scope to include governments, institutions and society itself. This nascent sphere, sometimes called “ecosystem alignment”, can draw on economics, history and game theory to help us understand what kinds of futures we can plausibly hope for, and how to aim for them.\n\nThe clearer we can see where we’re heading, and the better we coordinate, the more likely we are to create a future where humans remain relevant – not as competitors to AI, but as their beneficiaries and stewards. As it stands, we’re racing to build our own replacements.\n\n David Duvenaud is an associate professor of computer science at the University of Toronto, and co-director of the Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society. He thanks Raymond Douglas, Nora Ammann, Jan Kulveit, and David Krueger for help writing this article.\n\nFurther reading\n\nThe Coming Wave by Mustafa Suleyman and Michael Bhaskar (Vintage, £10.99)\n\nThe Last Human Job by Allison J Pugh (Princeton, £25)\n\nThe Precipice by Toby Ord (Bloomsbury, £12.99)\n\nExplore more on these topics\nArtificial intelligence (AI)\nThe big idea\nComputing\nHuman rights\nfeatures\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/books/2025/may/04/the-big-idea-can-we-stop-ai-making-humans-obsolete","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:09:44.016Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Moscow airports close as Ukrainian drones target city for second night","content":"Ukrainian drones targeted Moscow on Tuesday as the first foreign leaders landed in the capital ahead of a major military parade marking the end of the second world war.\n\nSergei Sobyanin, the mayor of Moscow, said Russian air defences shot down two drones en route to the capital on Tuesday evening. It was the second consecutive day of Ukrainian drone attacks, following two waves that temporarily shut several Moscow airports.\n\nUkraine’s drone campaign in Moscow appeared aimed at unnerving the Kremlin before the 9 May parade, which about three dozen foreign leaders – including China’s Xi Jinping – are expected to attend.\n\nVladimir Putin has proposed a three-day ceasefire to coincide with the 8-10 May second world war commemorations, which this year mark the 80th anniversary of the victory over Nazi Germany by the Soviet Union and the allied forces.\n\nBut the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, described the offer as self-serving and meaningless unless extended to 30 days, in line with a US-backed proposal that Putin has so far dismissed.\n\nUkraine war briefing: Second night of Moscow drone raids, Kursk substation hit\nRead more\n\nThere was no immediate comment from Kyiv about the latest drone attack.\n\nZelenskyy earlier warned that Ukraine “cannot bear responsibility for what happens” to foreign leaders attending the commemoration parade in Moscow.\n\nSecurity has been tightened in Moscow before the Victory Day celebrations, with residents experiencing major internet disruptions.\n\nRussia’s state-run Tass news agency reported that critical facilities in the capital had been placed under reinforced protection, while some Telegram social media channels reported that air defence systems had been transferred to protect Moscow.\n\nThe Russian foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, previously accused Zelenskyy of directly threatening the 9 May events, while the former president Dmitry Medvedev said “10 May may not come for Kyiv” if there were any “Victory Day provocations”.\n\nYuri Ushakov, Putin’s top foreign policy aide, said on Tuesday that 29 world leaders were expected to attend second world war Victory Day commemorations in Moscow in the coming days.\n\nUshakov added that military units from 13 countries, including China, would take part in the parade along with Russian troops and military vehicles.\n\nHowever, Ushakov denied earlier media reports claiming that North Korean troops – whom Pyongyang acknowledged for the first time in April had fought alongside Russian forces in Ukraine – would join the parade.\n\nIt will be the largest delegation of foreign leaders at the Red Square parade since Putin launched his full-scale invasion over three years ago – a show of support that Moscow will present as evidence it is not isolated.\n\nSo far, there is no indication that Ukraine will accept Moscow’s proposed three-day ceasefire, which Zelenskyy has dismissed as an “unserious” stunt aimed at ensuring smooth 9 May celebrations.\n\nThe US has been pressing Moscow to agree to a longer, one-month ceasefire though, on Monday, Trump appeared to tacitly support the Kremlin’s proposal.\n\n“As you know, President Putin just announced a three-day ceasefire, which doesn’t sound like much, but it’s a lot if you knew where we started from,” Trump told reporters in the Oval Office on Monday.\n\nMeanwhile, Ukraine’s military said its forces had been engaged in combat operations in Russia’s Kursk region over the previous 24 hours, despite Moscow saying it had defeated a Ukrainian incursion into the area.\n\nIn a daily update posted on Telegram, the military said its forces in the Kursk sector had fought off Russian attacks and come under fire from Russian artillery and air-dropped bombs.\n\nLocal Russian authorities appeared to confirm on Monday evening that Ukraine’s military had made gains along the border.\n\nVasily Khudyakov, the head of Glushkovo – a small settlement in the Kursk region – said Russian troops had begun evacuating all residents from the area.\n\n“Due to the worsening situation in the village, residents currently there must temporarily evacuate,” Khudyakov wrote on social media.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nRussia\nUkraine\nEurope\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/06/ukraine-drones-raid-moscow","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Pjotr Sauer","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:44:27.747Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Pentagon stopped Ukraine military aid shipments in February without Trump’s approval","content":"Roughly a week after Donald Trump started his second term as president, the US military issued an order to three freight airlines operating out of Dover air force base in Delaware and a US base in Qatar: stop 11 flights loaded with artillery shells and other weaponry that were bound for Ukraine.\n\nIn a matter of hours, frantic questions reached Washington from Ukrainians in Kyiv and from officials in Poland, where the shipments were coordinated. Who had ordered the US Transportation Command, known as TransCom, to halt the flights? Was it a permanent pause on all aid? Or just some?\n\nTop national security officials – in the White House, the Pentagon and the state department – couldn’t provide answers. Within one week, flights were back in the air.\n\nPete Hegseth scraps Pentagon’s Women, Peace and Security program citing DEI\nRead more\n\nThe verbal order originated from the office of Pete Hegseth, the secretary of defense, according to TransCom records reviewed by Reuters. A TransCom spokesperson said the command received the order via the Pentagon’s joint staff.\n\nThe cancelations came after Trump wrapped up a 30 January Oval Office meeting about Ukraine that included Hegseth and other top national security officials, according to three sources familiar with the situation. During the meeting, the idea of stopping Ukraine aid came up, said two people with knowledge of the meeting, but the president issued no instruction to halt it.\n\nThe president was unaware of Hegseth’s order, as were other top national security officials in the meeting, according to two sources briefed on the private White House discussions and another with direct knowledge of the matter.\n\nAsked to comment on this report, the White House told Reuters that Hegseth had followed a directive from Trump to pause aid to Ukraine, which it said was the administration’s position at the time. It did not explain why, according to those who spoke to Reuters, top national security officials in the normal decision-making process didn’t know about the order or why it was so swiftly reversed.\n\n“Negotiating an end to the Russia-Ukraine War has been a complex and fluid situation. We are not going to detail every conversation among top administration officials throughout the process,” said Karoline Leavitt, the White House press secretary. “The bottom line is the war is much closer to an end today than it was when President Trump took office.”\n\nThe cancelations cost TransCom $2.2m, according to the records reviewed by Reuters. In response to a request for comment, TransCom said that the total cost was $1.6m – 11 flights were canceled but one incurred no charge.\n\nAn order halting military aid authorized under the Biden administration went into effect officially a month later, on 4 March, with a White House announcement.\n\nThe story of how flights were canceled, detailed by Reuters for the first time, points to an at-times haphazard policymaking process within the Trump administration and a command structure that is unclear even to its own ranking members.\n\nThe multiday pause of the flights, confirmed by five people with knowledge of it, also shows confusion in how the administration has created and implemented national security policy. At the Pentagon, the disarray is an open secret, with many current and former officials saying the department is plagued by internal disagreements on foreign policy, deep-seated grudges and inexperienced staff.\n\nReuters couldn’t establish exactly when Hegseth’s office ordered the freight flights canceled. Two sources said Ukrainian and European officials began asking about the pause on 2 February. The TransCom records indicate that there was a verbal order from “SECDEF” – the secretary of defense – that stopped the flights and that they had resumed by 5 February.\n\n“This is consistent with the administration’s policy to move fast, break things and sort it out later. That is their managing philosophy,” said Mark Cancian, a retired US Marine officer and defense expert with the Center for Strategic and International Studies thinktank. “That is great for Silicon Valley. But when you’re talking about institutions that have been around for hundreds of years, you are going to run into problems.”\n\nThe stop in shipments caused consternation in Kyiv.\n\nThe Ukrainians quickly asked the administration through multiple channels but had difficulty obtaining any useful information, according to a Ukrainian official with direct knowledge of the situation. In later conversations with the Ukrainians, the administration wrote off the pause as “internal politics”, said the source. Ukrainian officials did not respond to requests for comment.\n\nThe shipping of American weapons to Ukraine requires signoff from multiple agencies and can take weeks or even months to complete, depending on the size of the cargo. The majority of US military assistance goes through a logistics hub in Poland before being picked up by Ukrainian representatives and transported into the country.\n\nThat hub can hold shipments for extended periods of time. It’s not clear if the 11 canceled flights were the only ones scheduled that week in February, how much aid was already stockpiled in Poland and if it continued to flow into Ukraine despite the US military’s orders.\n\nThe revelations come at a time of upheaval in the Pentagon. Several of Hegseth’s top advisers were escorted from the building on 15 April after being accused of unauthorized disclosure of classified information. The secretary continues to face scrutiny, including from Congress, about his own communications. Previously he’s attributed allegations of upheaval to disgruntled employees.\n\nThe canceled flights contained weapons that had long been approved by the Biden administration and authorized by lawmakers on Capitol Hill.\n\nReuters couldn’t determine if Hegseth or his team knew how the order to TransCom would play out or that the order would be a substantial change in US policy on Ukraine. Three sources familiar with the situation said Hegseth misinterpreted discussions with the president about Ukraine policy and aid shipments without elaborating further.\n\nFour other people briefed on the situation said a small cadre of staffers inside the Pentagon, many of whom have never held a government job and who have for years spoken out against US aid to Ukraine, advised Hegseth to consider pausing aid to the country.\n\nTwo people familiar with the matter denied there was a true cutoff in aid. One of them described it as a logistical pause.\n\n“[They] just wanted to get a handle on what was going on and people, as a result, misinterpreted that as: ‘You need to stop everything,’” said one.\n\nFlights canceled\n\nAccording to two sources with knowledge of the meeting, Hegseth arrived at the 30 January Oval Office meeting with Trump with a memo drafted by some of his top policy advisers, advocating that their boss push the White House to consider pausing weapons deliveries to Ukraine to gain leverage in peace negotiations with Russia.\n\nThe sources said the secretary attended the meeting with other top officials involved in Ukraine policy, including then national security adviser Mike Waltz and Ukraine envoy Keith Kellogg. The group broadly discussed US policy on Ukraine and Russia, including potentially tightening sanctions on Moscow.\n\nIt’s not clear the extent to which Hegseth proposed stopping aid during the meeting, but the idea came up in discussions, said one of the sources and another person familiar with the meeting.\n\nSince the beginning of Russia’s full-scale invasion in February 2022, the US had approved billions of dollars worth of military aid to Ukraine. Most was delivered under the Biden administration. But a few shipments remained in the pipeline, scheduled into this summer.\n\nTrump had threatened to freeze aid repeatedly on the campaign trail, but had yet to do so. And during the meeting, he again declined to stop aid to Ukraine or order Hegseth to implement any policy changes when it came to sending equipment to Kyiv, the sources said.\n\nAn order effectively freezing any military support for an ally would normally be discussed intensively among top national security officials and approved by the president. It requires the coordination of multiple agencies and often multiple freight companies.\n\nNone of that discussion or coordination happened when Hegseth’s office canceled the scheduled flights carrying American artillery shells and ammunition to Poland from Al Udeid military base in the United Arab Emirates and the Dover US military base in Delaware, three of the sources said.\n\nThe pause came as Ukraine’s military was struggling to fend off Russian forces in eastern Ukraine and in the consequential battle for the Kursk region of Russia, where Ukrainian forces were losing ground and have since all but been expelled.\n\nClose Trump advisers were tipped off to the pause by Pentagon staffers and discussed with the president whether to restore the aid shipments, according to two sources. By then, TransCom had canceled 11 flights, according to the records reviewed by Reuters. Some media outlets, including Reuters, wrote about the pause but Hegseth’s role was previously unknown.\n\nIt’s unclear if Trump subsequently questioned or reprimanded Hegseth. One source with direct knowledge of the matter said then national security adviser Waltz ultimately intervened to reverse the cancelations. Waltz was forced out on Thursday and is expected to be nominated as US ambassador to the United Nations.\n\nGrowing infighting\n\nWhen Trump entered office, aid to Ukraine continued flowing and he pledged to work with Ukraine and Russia to end the war – or at the very least broker a ceasefire.\n\nTwo of his most prominent envoys, Kellogg, a supporter of Kyiv who worked with Trump in his first administration, and Steve Witkoff, a real-estate magnate and close friend of the president, set out to negotiate with both parties.\n\nSeparately, at the Pentagon, some of Hegseth’s policy advisers privately started drafting proposals to pull back American support for Ukraine, according to two sources briefed on the matter.\n\nThat group of staffers align themselves closely with the anti-interventionist philosophy.\n\nSome have previously advised Republican lawmakers advocating for an America-first approach to foreign policy and have called publicly, in writings and talks, for the US to pull back from military commitments in the Middle East and Europe – a view similarly held by the vice-president, JD Vance. Several have advocated that the US instead focus on China.\n\nSupporters of the staffers have slammed those pushing back on the anti-interventionist movement in the administration, claiming Vance and others are merely trying to save the lives of people living in war zones such as Ukraine and prevent future American military deaths.\n\nThe infighting has complicated the policymaking process, according to a person familiar with the matter and four other sources. At a time when Kellogg and Witkoff are trying to broker a peace deal with Russia and Ukraine, the staffers have advocated behind the scenes for the US to draw back its support for Kyiv – a policy that has angered Ukrainian officials and put pressure on European allies to fill the gap, five people with knowledge of the situation said.\n\nWashington has signed a deal with Kyiv for rights to its rare earth minerals – an agreement US officials say is an attempt to recoup money the US has spent to prop up Ukraine’s war effort.\n\nAt least one of the staffers who had previously pushed for the administration to pull back its support for Kyiv, Dan Caldwell, was escorted out of the Pentagon for a leak he claims never happened. Caldwell, a veteran, served as one of Hegseth’s chief advisers, including on Ukraine.\n\nDespite the brief pause in February and the longer one that began in early March, the Trump administration has resumed sending the last of the aid approved under Joe Biden. No new policy has been announced.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nTrump administration\nPete Hegseth\nUkraine\nUS military\nDonald Trump\nUS foreign policy\nUS politics\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/06/canceled-ukraine-military-aid-shipments-trump-hegseth","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:44:30.338Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Germany’s Merz confirmed as chancellor in second vote following first round humiliation – as it happened","content":"Show key events only\nFrom 2h ago\n15.18 BST\nMerz confirmed as new German chancellor\n\n325 votes in favour, more than 316 required.\n\n289 against, one abstention, three invalid votes.\n\nHappy Friedrich Merz. Photograph: Hannibal Hanschke/EPA\nShare\n50s ago\n17.13 BST\nClosing summary\nJakub Krupa\n\n… and on that note, it’s a wrap from me, Jakub Krupa, for today.\n\nFriedrich Merz has been confirmed as the new German chancellor, despite an earlier humiliating defeat in the Bundestag, when he failed to get enough votes to confirm him in the office (10:09, all times in CEST).\n\n0:41\nFriedrich Merz confirmed as German chancellor in second vote – video\n\nDespite his “black-red” coalition of the CDU/CSU and the SPD formally having 328 votes at their disposal, he initially got only 310 votes in favour – six short of the required majority (10:18).\n\nThis was the first time a chancellor-designate failed to get confirmed in the first round of voting in postwar history of Germany.\n\nWhat held up Friedrich Merz’s confirmation as chancellor and what’s next for Germany?\nRead more\n\nBut after frenzied consultations behind the scenes, he later secured the necessary majority in the hastily arranged second vote on Tuesday afternoon, with 325 votes in favour (16:18, 16:20).\n\nThe new chancellor has picked up his certificate of appointment from the country’s president Frank-Walter Steinmeier (17:27) and is now going through all formalities needed to put his government fully in place (16:35, 17:49).\n\nDespite the unexpected delay, Merz seems to be set to carry on his plans to visit France and Poland on his first full day in the office tomorrow, as he wants to send the message that “Germany is back” and ready to offer stability in Europe (17:04, 17:30).\n\nHis appointment was welcomed by European leaders offering to work with him on a broader European agenda (16:54).\n\nHere’s the full story by our Berlin correspondent Deborah Cole:\n\nGerman parliament elects Merz as chancellor in second round of voting\nRead more\n\nAnd that’s all from me, Jakub Krupa, for today.\n\nI’m back tomorrow to cover the conclave. We are likely to need more than one round of votes there, too!\n\nHow does the conclave work and when will a new pope be chosen?\nRead more\n\nIf you have any tips, comments or suggestions, email me at jakub.krupa@theguardian.com.\n\nI am also on Bluesky at @jakubkrupa.bsky.social and on X at @jakubkrupa.\n\nShare\n18m ago\n16.55 BST\nEU unveils plans to be 'completely free' from Russian gas by end of 2027\nAjit Niranjan\n\nAnd speaking about the EU, the European Commission has unveiled a plan to be “completely free from Russian gas” by the end of 2027, almost five years after Vladimir Putin launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine.\n\nIn a roadmap to ending Russian energy imports, the EU executive called on member states to prevent new contracts with gas suppliers and stop existing spot contracts by the end of the year. It proposed banning imports of Russian pipeline gas and liquefied natural gas (LNG) under long-term contracts within the next 2.5 years.\n\nDan Jorgensen, the EU’s energy and housing commissioner, said the plan would “finish the job” of cutting reliance on EU imports of Russian energy, which came to €23bn in 2024.\n\n“No more will we permit Russia to weaponise energy against us,” he said. “No more will we allow our member states to be blackmailed. No more will we indirectly help fill up the war chests in the Kremlin.”\n\nView image in fullscreen\nEuropean Commissioner for Energy and Housing Dan Jorgensen speaks during a press conference at the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France. Photograph: Ronald Wittek/EPA\n\nThe EU has sought to kick its decades-long dependence to Russian fossil fuels since the war in Ukraine, introducing sanctions that effectively banned coal and oil imports as it slowly reduced reliance on gas. The new proposals, which for the first time set an end-date for gas, include further measures to crack down on the Russian “shadow fleet” circumventing oil sanctions and restrict imports of uranium used in nuclear reactors.\n\nSvitlana Romanko, executive director of Ukrainian climate group Razom We Stand, welcomed the proposals but criticised the absence of a clear spot market trade ban as a “major political failure.”\n\n“Without mandatory certificates of origin for LNG, the EU cannot close the biggest loophole in its energy sanctions: Russian gas traded on short-term spot markets. These untraceable shipments continue to fuel the Kremlin’s war while quietly entering EU ports.”\n\nThe Commission said the gas restrictions in the new proposal would have a “limited” impact on gas prices because of reductions in overall gas demand driven by renewables and energy-saving measures; increased global supplies of LNG and new European terminals to receive shipments; and new gas projects in Romania and Azerbaijan.\n\nGreenpeace campaigner Thomas Gelin called on governments to do more to boost renewables rather than buying fossil fuels from other countries such as the US. The Trump administration has pressured Europe to buy more of its LNG as part of an escalating trade war.\n\n“Keeping money flowing to Putin’s war chest for these fuels is scandalous, but the Commission risks replacing one disastrous dependency with another – unplugging Putin’s gas and plugging in Trump’s,” he said.\n\nShare\n21m ago\n16.52 BST\nEU set to monitor Chinese imports into the bloc after Trump's tariffs\nLisa O'Carroll\n\nSeparately, the EU has launched a market surveillance of Chinese imports into the bloc amid fears that the trade war with the US is diverting goods to Europe.\n\nTrade commissioner Maroš Šefčovič has again warned that the existing tariffs on the automotive and steel sectors along with the threat of tariffs in six other areas is “unacceptable”.\n\nSpeaking at the European parliament on Tuesday he again urged the US to cut a deal describing the EU as “by far the most important economic partner of the US”.\n\nHe said if Trump carries through his various threats of tariffs in addition to existing import duties on cars and steel, its import taxes would jump from €7bn in 2024 to €100bn.\n\n“This situation is not acceptable and we cannot afford to stay idle,“ he said.\n\nIf it doesn’t cut a deal it is prepared for retaliatory tariffs and litigation, he warned.\n\nIn the meantime the EU has started monitoring potential diversion of trade from China to the US to Europe with the first results of the survey anticipated in mid-May.\n\n“The aim is to protect the EU market from possible surges of imports from other countries that are also hit by US tariffs and which seek alternative markets. The first results of this work are anticipated in mid-May,” he said.\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n16.56 BST\n22m ago\n16.51 BST\nEU on charm offensive in Beijing and Washington to smoothen trade relations\nLisa O'Carroll\n\nThe EU is on a double charm offensive today in Beijing and Washington with Sabine Weyand (who headed Michel Barner’s Brexit trade negotiations) in DC for technical talks.\n\nIt is part of the EU bid to try and persuade Donald Trump to drop tariffs on cars and steel and not go ahead with other tariffs including pharma, film and a blanket 20% ‘reciprocal tariff’ on EU exports.\n\nThe EU is deeply concerned that if the US keeps its tariffs prohibitively high against Chinese exports, China will divert its over-supply of goods to the bloc.\n\nThe EU has already imposed tariffs on Chinese electric cars and there is talk of imposing further conditions on Chinese investment in EU member states along with price undertakings for exports.\n\nOver in Beijing the EU held a reception to make its 50th anniversary of relations with China sponsored by all the main groups that could be impacted by the trade wars including for foreign spirits producers, Pernod-Ricard, BMW and the European Automobile Manufacturers Association.\n\nAt a reception in Beijing on Tuesday, EU ambassador Jorge Toledo underlined the EU’s message – work with us not against us in the face of trade chaos.\n\nHe warned the rapid growth in the Chinese economy had “created imbalances, some of which are at risk of becoming unsustainable”.\n\nBut he added: “We need to address what we strongly feel is a lack of level playing field for our companies and exporters in the Chinese market.\n\n“If we want our relation to continue prospering, we need to do that with determination, especially now, to prevent that barriers be erected between us, when the world seems to be fragmenting.”\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n16.56 BST\n24m ago\n16.49 BST\nJakub Krupa\n\nLet me quickly bring you some other updates from across Europe.\n\nShare\n24m ago\n16.49 BST\nAfter day of high drama, visibly relieved Merz is now formally German chancellor\nJakub Krupa\n\nAfter a day of high-level political drama, it all ends well for Friedrich Merz as he is now the new German chancellor. He is visibly relieved now that he’s confirmed and frankly, can’t blame him for it.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nFriedrich Merz of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) reacts during his swearing in ceremony as new German Chancellor at the lower house of parliament Bundestag, in Berlin, Germany. Photograph: Lisi Niesner/Reuters\n\nHe will complete the ceremonial procedures later this afternoon and evening, with formal confirmation of his ministers yet to take place, but is expected in Paris and Warsaw tomorrow to show that “Germany is back,” as he promised.\n\nGiven the enormous task of challenges ahead – just think of the global outlook, security, migration, the economy, and domestic politics – it won’t be a smooth sailing for his government, but he is in and that job starts here.\n\n0:41\nFriedrich Merz confirmed as German chancellor in second vote – video\nShare\nUpdated at \n16.52 BST\n30m ago\n16.44 BST\nMerz takes oath of office in Bundestag\n\nFriedrich Merz has just taken the oath of office in the Bundestag.\n\nAs per the constitution, here is how it goes:\n\n“I swear that I will dedicate my efforts to the well-being of the German people, promote their welfare, protect them from harm, uphold and defend the Basic Law and the laws of the Federation, perform my duties conscientiously and do justice to all.\n\nSo help me God.”\n\nThe religious bit at the end, “so help me God,” is optional – Scholz didn’t say it – but as Merz is a Catholic, he opts to say it.\n\nAnd that’s it.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nPresident of the Bundestag (lower house of parliament) Julia Klöckner takes the oath from designated German Chancellor Friedrich Merz after a second round of voting during a session at the Bundestag. Photograph: Ralf Hirschberger/AFP/Getty Images\nShare\n44m ago\n16.30 BST\n'Up to us to make Franco-German engine ... stronger than ever,' Macron tells Merz\n\nFrench president Emmanuel Macron has now also offered his congratulations, in German, telling Friedrich Merz “it is up to us to make the Franco-German engine … stronger than ever” and to “accelerate our European agenda for sovereigtny, security and competitiveness.”\n\nHe also confirms the pair will meet tomorrow, as part of Merz’s first foreign trip to Paris and Warsaw.\n\nShare\n47m ago\n16.27 BST\nMerz picks up certificate of appointment as new German chancellor\n\nTold you it was a very short drive!\n\nChancellor Merz has now picked up his certificate of appointment from president Frank-Walter Steinmeier, and is on his way back to the Bundestag to take the oath of office.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nHead of the president office Dörte Dinger welcomes designated German Chancellor Friedrich Merz on his way to receive his certificate of appointment from German President Frank-Walter Steinmeier at Bellevue Palace in Berlin, Germany. Photograph: Bernd von Jutrczenka/Reuters\nView image in fullscreen\nGerman President Frank-Walter Steinmeier, right, presents Federal Chancellor Friedrich Merz with his certificate of appointment at Bellevue Palace in Berlin, Germany. Photograph: Bernd von Jutrczenka/AP\nView image in fullscreen\nIncoming German Chancellor Friedrich Merz showing his certificate of appointment from German President Frank-Walter Steinmeier during a ceremony at Bellevue Palace in Berlin, Germany. Photograph: Annegret Hilse/Reuters\nShare\n1h ago\n16.04 BST\n\nLooks like Merz’s trip to Warsaw tomorrow is on, as Poland’s Donald Tusk has just posted a social media update saying:\n\nCongratulations @_FriedrichMerz! And see you tomorrow in Warsaw, Chancellor.\n\nShare\n1h ago\n15.54 BST\nMore messages from European leaders for chancellor Merz\n\nLots of messages from other leaders coming through on social media now.\n\nEuropean Council president António Costa joined to the chorus with congratulations in German – Herzlichen Glückwunsch! – as he said he was “looking forward to our work together on an ambitious common European agenda.”\n\nAustrian chancellor Christian Stocker said “a common border also means shared responsibility – I look forward to friendly cooperation between us and our governments.”\n\nEstonian prime minister Kristen Michal said that “a strong and prosperous Germany strengthens all of Europe,” while Swedish premier Ulf Kristersson stressed that “Germany is a like-minded country and trusted neighbour.”\n\nFinland’s prime minister Petteri Orpo struck a similar note, saying “Germany’s role and leadership is decisive in safeguarding Europe’s security.”\n\nCzech prime minister Petr Fiala said he was “pleased it is he who will lead a country so closely connected with ours in many areas,” stressing that “the chancellor and I share a common view on the need to tackle illegal migration, strengthen defence and securitty, and ensure Europe remains competitive.”\n\nLithuanian president Gitanas Nausėda stressed that “together we stand for security, democracy, and a strong alliance,” noting Germany’s “historic milestone of 70 years of Nato membership.”\n\nLatvian prime minister Evika Siliņa said her country “values Germany’s leadership in Europe and its significant role in security and prosperity of the Baltic Sea region.”\n\nShare\n1 of 5\nNext\nOldest\nExplore more on these topics\nGermany\nEurope live with Jakub Krupa\nFriedrich Merz\nEurope\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2025/may/06/friedrich-merz-german-chancellor-europe-live-latest-news","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:44:32.243Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"French hunter, 81, avoids jail after killing endangered female bear in Pyrenees","content":"An 81-year-old French hunter has avoided jail after killing an endangered female bear that attacked him in the Pyrenees in 2021, in an incident that sparked fierce criticism from environmental associations.\n\nThe defendant, who said he had no choice but to open fire when a brown bear attacked him while he was boar-hunting in the mountain range separating France and Spain, was given a four-month suspended jail sentence.\n\nThe court also fined 15 other defendants who participated in the hunt several hundred euros and temporarily revoked the hunting licences of two of them.\n\nIn addition, all 16 defendants will have to collectively pay more than €60,000 (£50,900) to the environmental associations that brought the civil suit.\n\nDuring the March trial in Foix in southern France, the prosecution said that the main defendant and 15 other hunters should not have been in the Mont Valier nature reserve in the first place.\n\nDefence lawyer Charles Lagier had argued that all the defendants should be acquitted, saying that the hunter killed the bear because he had “no other option”.\n\nBrown bear population in Pyrenees highest for a century, says study\nRead more\n\nOn 20 November 2021, two bear cubs emerged from the woods in front of the hunter. Then their mother appeared, charging at the man and dragging him for several metres. He shot and killed the animal.\n\nAccording to the investigation, the bear – nicknamed Caramelles – was killed 400 metres (1,300ft) outside an authorised hunting area.\n\nWhen the cubs emerged, “I looked at them with admiration,” the defendant said during the trial. “I made myself very small. Then the mother saw me. Our eyes met, she charged.”\n\nHe said he had no choice but to shoot.\n\n“She grabbed my left thigh, I panicked and fired a shot. She backed away growling, she went around me and bit my right calf, I fell, she was eating my leg,” he added. “I reloaded my rifle and fired.”\n\nThe defendant “killed a bear because he had no other option; it was necessity. This does not call for criminal charges,” Lagier argued during the trial.\n\nBut Alice Terrasse, the lawyer representing several environmental associations at the trial, called for all 16 hunters to be convicted and requested a bear be introduced “to compensate for Caramelles’ death”.\n\nSuch an operation would cost €100,000, Terrasse said in March.\n\nAnimal rights activists view bears as integral to maintaining a fragile mountain ecosystem under threat from human activity and the climate crisis.\n\nBears had nearly disappeared from the mountain range before France began a reintroduction programme in the 1990s, importing them from Slovenia.\n\nFrance’s biodiversity office estimates the Pyrenees are home to between 97 and 127 bears.\n\nThe presence of the predator has led to increasing tensions with farmers because of the threat they pose to their livestock.\n\nBut for Alain Reynes, of the bear preservation association Pays de L’Ours, the case offers an opportunity to “help move forward the debate on how hunting and bears can coexist”.\n\n\nExplore more on these topics\nFrance\nEndangered species\nWildlife\nEurope\nAnimals\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/06/french-hunter-81-avoids-jail-after-killing-endangered-female-bear-in-pyrenees","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:44:37.913Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Weather tracker: Deadly storms in India and huge hailstones in Paris","content":"Residents of Delhi and surrounding areas woke last week to severe thunderstorms with intense rainfall, large hailstones and squally winds. The storms arrived in the early hours of the night, lasting six hours before easing by about 8.30am on Friday morning. At Safdarjung, the primary weather station in Delhi, 77mm of rain was recorded, the majority of which, 60mm, fell within the first three hours. The event itself was the second highest 24-hour rainfall total in Delhi during May since 1901. The deluge of rain led to flash flooding, felled trees, widespread disruption and claimed seven lives.\n\nFurther sharp showers are forecast across India this week, alongside thunderstorms across western and central parts where relatively cooler air will become situated aloft through the course of Monday and promote convection. Some forecast models show the potential for thunderstorms to produce very heavy rainfall, particularly in Gujarat and south-west Rajasthan, until Thursday. However, due to the nature of thunderstorm formation, the exact intensity can be difficult to forecast days ahead, and often still proves too tricky to predict on the day. So the conditions in Delhi on Friday morning may not have been a one-off.\n\nCooler air will also bring lower than normal daytime temperatures to these regions with temperatures broadly 3-5C lower than normal, which is typically the high-30Cs . The city of Surat, located in the south of Gujarat, may have temperatures quelled by up to 7-8C during the middle of the week, with temperatures reaching about 30C. These lower temperatures will be welcome respite after the early heatwave conditions in April and the ongoing heat elsewhere in the nation.\n\nWestern Europe has had its fair share of showers too as an area of low pressure swept eastward across the Iberian peninsula over the weekend, which brought clusters of heavy storms to northern France on Saturday. Paris was among the places affected, with bursts of hail across the city covering streets with marble-sized hailstones, and four metro stations being shut down due to flash flooding. This area of low pressure is expected to continue moving east, with Italy in line for stormy conditions on Monday and Tuesday, particularly in the north and west, where the Italian meteorological service has issued amber warnings.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nIndia\nWeather tracker\nParis\nFrance\nItaly\nSouth and central Asia\nEurope\nExtreme weather\nanalysis\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2025/may/05/weather-tracker-deadly-storms-india-huge-hail-paris","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:44:43.975Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Carney says Canada ‘will never be for sale’ and Trump responds ‘never say never’ – live","content":"Show key events only\nFrom 19m ago\n17.24 BST\nCarney says Canada 'will never be for sale'\n\nCanada’s prime minister Mark Carney says “some places are never for sale” after Donald Trump says he is still interested in making Canada the 51st state of the United States.\n\nCarney tells reporters:\n\nAs you know from real estate, there are some places that are never for sale.\n\nThe White House and Buckingham Palace aren’t, Carney says, and Canada is “not for sale, it won’t be for sale, ever.”\n\n“Never say never,” Trump quips.\n\nCarney smiles and mouths “never, never, never.”\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n17.35 BST\n5m ago\n17.39 BST\n\nTrump says USMCA, the US-Mexico-Canada agreement, is “a good deal for everybody”.\n\nCanadian prime minister Mark Carney says the deal is a “basis for a broader negotiation” and that “some things about it are going to have to change”.\n\nShare\n10m ago\n17.33 BST\n\nTrump, asked about China, says Beijing’s economy is “suffering greatly” because of tariffs that he has brought in.\n\nHe says that China wants to negotiate a trade deal to end the tariffs, and that “we will be meeting with them at the right time.”\n\nShare\n19m ago\n17.24 BST\nCarney says Canada 'will never be for sale'\n\nCanada’s prime minister Mark Carney says “some places are never for sale” after Donald Trump says he is still interested in making Canada the 51st state of the United States.\n\nCarney tells reporters:\n\nAs you know from real estate, there are some places that are never for sale.\n\nThe White House and Buckingham Palace aren’t, Carney says, and Canada is “not for sale, it won’t be for sale, ever.”\n\n“Never say never,” Trump quips.\n\nCarney smiles and mouths “never, never, never.”\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n17.35 BST\n22m ago\n17.22 BST\nTrump says he wants 'friendship' with Canada\n\nTrump says he wants “friendship” with Canada. “We’re gonna be friends with Canada, regardless of anything,” he tells reporters.\n\nHe says he has “a lot of respect” for the Canadians and that it is a “very special place”.\n\nHe says he stands by his comments to make Canada the 51st state of the United States, although he says “it takes two to tango”. He adds:\n\nIt would really be a wonderful marriage.\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n17.28 BST\n24m ago\n17.20 BST\n\nCanada’s prime minister Mark Carney calls Donald Trump a “transformational president”.\n\nHe says he has been elected in order to “transform” Canada with a “similar focus” on the economy and securing borders. Carney says:\n\nThe history of Canada and the US is [that] we’re stronger when we work together.\n\nShare\n28m ago\n17.16 BST\nTrump says he will make a 'very big announcement' ahead of Middle East trip\n\nTrump says he will have a “very, very big” announcement to make, “either Thursday or Friday or Monday” and that it will be “as big as it gets”.\n\nI won’t tell you on what, but it’s very positive.\n\nHe says it will be “one of the most important announcements that have been made in many years about a certain subject”.\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n17.17 BST\n29m ago\n17.14 BST\n\nTrump says the US will stop bombing the Houthi group “effectively immediately”.\n\n“The Houthis have announced to us that they don’t want to fight anymore,” Trump tells reporters.\n\nThey don’t want to fight, and we will honor that, and we will stop the bombings.\n\nShare\n31m ago\n17.12 BST\n\nTrump says Canadians have elected a “very talented” and “very good” person, and says he and Mark Carney spoke “quite a few times” before the Canadian election.\n\nTrump says he and Carney have “a lot of things in common” but that “we have some tough points to go over.”\n\nHe says the pair will be discussing the war in Ukraine, and that Carney “wants it ended as quickly as I do.”\n\nShare\n34m ago\n17.10 BST\n\nDonald Trump and Canada’s prime minister, Mark Carney, are speaking to reporters in the Oval Office ahead of talks.\n\nTrump says it’s a “great honor” to have the Canadian leader at the White House, and notes that Carney won a “very big” election recently.\n\n“I think I was probably the greatest thing that happened to him,” Trump says.\n\nHis party was losing a lot, and he ended up winning. So I really want to congratulate him, probably one of the greatest comebacks in the history of politics, maybe even greater than mine.\n\nShare\n48m ago\n16.56 BST\nCarney arrives at White House\n\nDonald Trump has greeted Canada’s prime minister, Mark Carney, at the White House.\n\nThe pair shook hands and smiled for the cameras before heading inside. They did not answer questions from reporters on a US-Canada trade deal.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nUS President Donald Trump greets Canadian Prime Minister Mark Carney as he arrives at the White House in Washington, DC. Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images\nShare\nUpdated at \n16.59 BST\n49m ago\n16.54 BST\n\nHere’s a look at who will be joining the Canadian prime minister, Mark Carney, and Donald Trump in their White House meeting today, according to CBC.\n\nThe Canadian delegation will include:\n\nInternational trade minister Dominic LeBlanc\n\nForeign affairs minister Mélanie Joly\n\nPublic safety minister David McGuinty\n\nCanada’s ambassador to the US Kirsten Hillman\n\nClerk of the privy council John Hannaford\n\nCarney’s interim chief of staff Marco Mendicino\n\nSenior adviser Lisa Jorgensen\n\nAnd on the US side:\n\nVice-president JD Vance\n\nSecretary of state Marco Rubio\n\nSecretary of commerce Howard Lutnick\n\nUS trade representative Jamieson Greer\n\nTrump’s chief of staff Susie Wiles\n\nDeputy chief of staff Stephen Miller\n\nUS ambassador to Canada Pete Hoekstra\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n17.05 BST\n1h ago\n16.29 BST\nTrump says US 'doesn't need anything' from Canada ahead of meeting with Carney\n\nDonald Trump has posted on his Truth Social platform to say that he is looking forward to meeting with Canada’s prime minister, Mark Carney.\n\nTrump says he “very much want[s] to work with him, but cannot understand one simple TRUTH — Why is America subsidizing Canada by $200 Billion Dollars a year, in addition to giving them FREE Military Protection, and many other things?”\n\nWe don’t need their Cars, we don’t need their Energy, we don’t need their Lumber, we don’t need ANYTHING they have, other than their friendship, which hopefully we will always maintain. They, on the other hand, need EVERYTHING from us!\n\nHe says Carney will be arriving shortly at the White House and that this will “be, most likely, my only question of consequence.”\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n16.38 BST\n1h ago\n16.16 BST\n\nIn a heated exchange at an oversight hearing of the House appropriations subcommittee on homeland security, Kristi Noem was forced to acknowledge that the US government doesn’t have the right to deport US citizens.\n\nNoem was grilled by Democratic representative from Illinois Lauren Underwood on Donald Trump’s comments about not knowing whether he has to uphold the constitution and asked if she herself was committed to the constitution, per the oath she swore on taking on her role as homeland security secretary. “Absolutely”, Noem replied.\n\n“Of course the president is within his authority to drive policy decisions within the bounds of federal law and the constitution, but that’s not what you’ve been doing,” said Underwood.\n\nWhat I’m asking is whether you believe that you have the authority to ignore appropriations law. Do you believe that the constitution gives the executive branch unilateral authority to withhold funds appropriated by the legislative branch?\n\nUnderwood stopped Noem several times for not answering the question and said the president is “expected to follow the law” in seeking rescissions if he disagrees with certain spending, stating that it is Congress, not the president, that controls the power of the purse.\n\nUnderwood then pressed Noem several times for a “yes or no” answer on whether she believes the constitution guarantees everyone in the US the right to due process.\n\n“Do you believe that the US government has the authority to deport American citizens?” she asked. Noem replied: “No, and we are not deporting US citizens.” Underwood said she was glad to hear that Noem didn’t believe they had that authority, adding:\n\nI know everyone viewing this hearing knows that several US citizens have been deported to date.\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n16.32 BST\n1 of 3\nNext\nOldest\nExplore more on these topics\nTrump administration\nUS politics live\nDonald Trump\nMark Carney\nRussia\nUkraine\nHarvard University\nHigher education\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2025/may/06/donald-trump-mark-carney-us-canada-tariffs-film-harvard-news-live-updates","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:45:14.042Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Pentagon stopped Ukraine military aid shipments in February without Trump’s approval","content":"Roughly a week after Donald Trump started his second term as president, the US military issued an order to three freight airlines operating out of Dover air force base in Delaware and a US base in Qatar: stop 11 flights loaded with artillery shells and other weaponry that were bound for Ukraine.\n\nIn a matter of hours, frantic questions reached Washington from Ukrainians in Kyiv and from officials in Poland, where the shipments were coordinated. Who had ordered the US Transportation Command, known as TransCom, to halt the flights? Was it a permanent pause on all aid? Or just some?\n\nTop national security officials – in the White House, the Pentagon and the state department – couldn’t provide answers. Within one week, flights were back in the air.\n\nPete Hegseth scraps Pentagon’s Women, Peace and Security program citing DEI\nRead more\n\nThe verbal order originated from the office of Pete Hegseth, the secretary of defense, according to TransCom records reviewed by Reuters. A TransCom spokesperson said the command received the order via the Pentagon’s joint staff.\n\nThe cancelations came after Trump wrapped up a 30 January Oval Office meeting about Ukraine that included Hegseth and other top national security officials, according to three sources familiar with the situation. During the meeting, the idea of stopping Ukraine aid came up, said two people with knowledge of the meeting, but the president issued no instruction to halt it.\n\nThe president was unaware of Hegseth’s order, as were other top national security officials in the meeting, according to two sources briefed on the private White House discussions and another with direct knowledge of the matter.\n\nAsked to comment on this report, the White House told Reuters that Hegseth had followed a directive from Trump to pause aid to Ukraine, which it said was the administration’s position at the time. It did not explain why, according to those who spoke to Reuters, top national security officials in the normal decision-making process didn’t know about the order or why it was so swiftly reversed.\n\n“Negotiating an end to the Russia-Ukraine War has been a complex and fluid situation. We are not going to detail every conversation among top administration officials throughout the process,” said Karoline Leavitt, the White House press secretary. “The bottom line is the war is much closer to an end today than it was when President Trump took office.”\n\nThe cancelations cost TransCom $2.2m, according to the records reviewed by Reuters. In response to a request for comment, TransCom said that the total cost was $1.6m – 11 flights were canceled but one incurred no charge.\n\nAn order halting military aid authorized under the Biden administration went into effect officially a month later, on 4 March, with a White House announcement.\n\nThe story of how flights were canceled, detailed by Reuters for the first time, points to an at-times haphazard policymaking process within the Trump administration and a command structure that is unclear even to its own ranking members.\n\nThe multiday pause of the flights, confirmed by five people with knowledge of it, also shows confusion in how the administration has created and implemented national security policy. At the Pentagon, the disarray is an open secret, with many current and former officials saying the department is plagued by internal disagreements on foreign policy, deep-seated grudges and inexperienced staff.\n\nReuters couldn’t establish exactly when Hegseth’s office ordered the freight flights canceled. Two sources said Ukrainian and European officials began asking about the pause on 2 February. The TransCom records indicate that there was a verbal order from “SECDEF” – the secretary of defense – that stopped the flights and that they had resumed by 5 February.\n\n“This is consistent with the administration’s policy to move fast, break things and sort it out later. That is their managing philosophy,” said Mark Cancian, a retired US Marine officer and defense expert with the Center for Strategic and International Studies thinktank. “That is great for Silicon Valley. But when you’re talking about institutions that have been around for hundreds of years, you are going to run into problems.”\n\nThe stop in shipments caused consternation in Kyiv.\n\nThe Ukrainians quickly asked the administration through multiple channels but had difficulty obtaining any useful information, according to a Ukrainian official with direct knowledge of the situation. In later conversations with the Ukrainians, the administration wrote off the pause as “internal politics”, said the source. Ukrainian officials did not respond to requests for comment.\n\nThe shipping of American weapons to Ukraine requires signoff from multiple agencies and can take weeks or even months to complete, depending on the size of the cargo. The majority of US military assistance goes through a logistics hub in Poland before being picked up by Ukrainian representatives and transported into the country.\n\nThat hub can hold shipments for extended periods of time. It’s not clear if the 11 canceled flights were the only ones scheduled that week in February, how much aid was already stockpiled in Poland and if it continued to flow into Ukraine despite the US military’s orders.\n\nThe revelations come at a time of upheaval in the Pentagon. Several of Hegseth’s top advisers were escorted from the building on 15 April after being accused of unauthorized disclosure of classified information. The secretary continues to face scrutiny, including from Congress, about his own communications. Previously he’s attributed allegations of upheaval to disgruntled employees.\n\nThe canceled flights contained weapons that had long been approved by the Biden administration and authorized by lawmakers on Capitol Hill.\n\nReuters couldn’t determine if Hegseth or his team knew how the order to TransCom would play out or that the order would be a substantial change in US policy on Ukraine. Three sources familiar with the situation said Hegseth misinterpreted discussions with the president about Ukraine policy and aid shipments without elaborating further.\n\nFour other people briefed on the situation said a small cadre of staffers inside the Pentagon, many of whom have never held a government job and who have for years spoken out against US aid to Ukraine, advised Hegseth to consider pausing aid to the country.\n\nTwo people familiar with the matter denied there was a true cutoff in aid. One of them described it as a logistical pause.\n\n“[They] just wanted to get a handle on what was going on and people, as a result, misinterpreted that as: ‘You need to stop everything,’” said one.\n\nFlights canceled\n\nAccording to two sources with knowledge of the meeting, Hegseth arrived at the 30 January Oval Office meeting with Trump with a memo drafted by some of his top policy advisers, advocating that their boss push the White House to consider pausing weapons deliveries to Ukraine to gain leverage in peace negotiations with Russia.\n\nThe sources said the secretary attended the meeting with other top officials involved in Ukraine policy, including then national security adviser Mike Waltz and Ukraine envoy Keith Kellogg. The group broadly discussed US policy on Ukraine and Russia, including potentially tightening sanctions on Moscow.\n\nIt’s not clear the extent to which Hegseth proposed stopping aid during the meeting, but the idea came up in discussions, said one of the sources and another person familiar with the meeting.\n\nSince the beginning of Russia’s full-scale invasion in February 2022, the US had approved billions of dollars worth of military aid to Ukraine. Most was delivered under the Biden administration. But a few shipments remained in the pipeline, scheduled into this summer.\n\nTrump had threatened to freeze aid repeatedly on the campaign trail, but had yet to do so. And during the meeting, he again declined to stop aid to Ukraine or order Hegseth to implement any policy changes when it came to sending equipment to Kyiv, the sources said.\n\nAn order effectively freezing any military support for an ally would normally be discussed intensively among top national security officials and approved by the president. It requires the coordination of multiple agencies and often multiple freight companies.\n\nNone of that discussion or coordination happened when Hegseth’s office canceled the scheduled flights carrying American artillery shells and ammunition to Poland from Al Udeid military base in the United Arab Emirates and the Dover US military base in Delaware, three of the sources said.\n\nThe pause came as Ukraine’s military was struggling to fend off Russian forces in eastern Ukraine and in the consequential battle for the Kursk region of Russia, where Ukrainian forces were losing ground and have since all but been expelled.\n\nClose Trump advisers were tipped off to the pause by Pentagon staffers and discussed with the president whether to restore the aid shipments, according to two sources. By then, TransCom had canceled 11 flights, according to the records reviewed by Reuters. Some media outlets, including Reuters, wrote about the pause but Hegseth’s role was previously unknown.\n\nIt’s unclear if Trump subsequently questioned or reprimanded Hegseth. One source with direct knowledge of the matter said then national security adviser Waltz ultimately intervened to reverse the cancelations. Waltz was forced out on Thursday and is expected to be nominated as US ambassador to the United Nations.\n\nGrowing infighting\n\nWhen Trump entered office, aid to Ukraine continued flowing and he pledged to work with Ukraine and Russia to end the war – or at the very least broker a ceasefire.\n\nTwo of his most prominent envoys, Kellogg, a supporter of Kyiv who worked with Trump in his first administration, and Steve Witkoff, a real-estate magnate and close friend of the president, set out to negotiate with both parties.\n\nSeparately, at the Pentagon, some of Hegseth’s policy advisers privately started drafting proposals to pull back American support for Ukraine, according to two sources briefed on the matter.\n\nThat group of staffers align themselves closely with the anti-interventionist philosophy.\n\nSome have previously advised Republican lawmakers advocating for an America-first approach to foreign policy and have called publicly, in writings and talks, for the US to pull back from military commitments in the Middle East and Europe – a view similarly held by the vice-president, JD Vance. Several have advocated that the US instead focus on China.\n\nSupporters of the staffers have slammed those pushing back on the anti-interventionist movement in the administration, claiming Vance and others are merely trying to save the lives of people living in war zones such as Ukraine and prevent future American military deaths.\n\nThe infighting has complicated the policymaking process, according to a person familiar with the matter and four other sources. At a time when Kellogg and Witkoff are trying to broker a peace deal with Russia and Ukraine, the staffers have advocated behind the scenes for the US to draw back its support for Kyiv – a policy that has angered Ukrainian officials and put pressure on European allies to fill the gap, five people with knowledge of the situation said.\n\nWashington has signed a deal with Kyiv for rights to its rare earth minerals – an agreement US officials say is an attempt to recoup money the US has spent to prop up Ukraine’s war effort.\n\nAt least one of the staffers who had previously pushed for the administration to pull back its support for Kyiv, Dan Caldwell, was escorted out of the Pentagon for a leak he claims never happened. Caldwell, a veteran, served as one of Hegseth’s chief advisers, including on Ukraine.\n\nDespite the brief pause in February and the longer one that began in early March, the Trump administration has resumed sending the last of the aid approved under Joe Biden. No new policy has been announced.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nTrump administration\nPete Hegseth\nUkraine\nUS military\nDonald Trump\nUS foreign policy\nUS politics\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/06/canceled-ukraine-military-aid-shipments-trump-hegseth","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:45:17.083Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Newsom offers to work with Trump on $7.5bn tax credit plan to boost US films","content":"The California governor, Gavin Newsom, has proposed a $7.5bn tax credit program and offered to work with Donald Trump to boost US film production after the president threatened to slap 100% tariffs on films made abroad, alarming industry executives in Hollywood and abroad.\n\nNewsom – who has had an often fractious relationship with Trump – unveiled his idea after Hollywood reacted nervously to the president’s tariffs plan, which sent share values in some film and media companies plummeting.\n\nIn a statement, Newsom said California – the historic home of the US film industry – was “eager to partner with the Trump administration to further strengthen domestic production and Make America Film Again”.\n\n“America continues to be a film powerhouse, and California is all in to bring more production here,” Newsom said.\n\nA spokesperson for his office told the Washington Post that the program, if it came to fruition, would be the biggest government tax initiative for the film industry in US history and the first at a federal level.\n\nThe initiative was triggered after Trump posted on his Truth Social platform that the US film industry was “dying” and unveiled plans for a tariffs on overseas-made productions to reverse the trend, which he called “a national security threat”.\n\nTax incentives and subsidies have seen an increasing number of big productions being shot on location in countries like Britain, Canada and the Czech Republic, reversing a historic trend that saw most Hollywood films during the 20th century shot in Los Angeles\n\nThis year’s biggest-grossing film, A Minecraft Movie, was shot in Canada, while the next film in the Mission: Impossible series, due for release on Memorial Day, was shot in the UK and other foreign locations.\n\nHollywood executives reacted with alarm to Trump’s tariff plan, the Wall Street Journal reported, noting they “expressed confusion over how a levy could be applied to intellectual property with no specific monetary value”. The Journal also noted that the executives were fearful of retaliatory tariffs as they could impact their overseas business.\n\nOn Monday, shares in media companies and movie theater chains like Disney, Netflix and beyond fell.\n\nThe Journal also reported that Jon Voight, the 86-year-old actor and Trump appointed “special ambassador” to Hollywood, discussed a federal policy with tax incentives and infrastructure subsidies to encourage studios to conduct more of their production work in the US at a meeting with Trump at Mar-a-Lago last weekend.\n\nIn a statement on Monday, Voight said: “We look forward to working with the administration, the unions, studios and streamers to help form a plan to keep our industry healthy and bring more productions back to America.\n\nskip past newsletter promotion\n\nSign up to Headlines US\n\nFree newsletter\n\nGet the most important US headlines and highlights emailed direct to you every morning\n\nEnter your email address\nSign up\nPrivacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.\n\nafter newsletter promotion\n\n“By creating the right environment through smart incentives, updated policies, and much-needed support, we can ensure that American production companies thrive, more jobs stay here at home, and Hollywood once again leads the world in creativity and innovation.”\n\nVoight and his manager, Steven Paul, reportedly submitted a “comprehensive plan” to Trump about “what changes need to be made to increase domestic film production,” according to NBC News.\n\nNewsom’s tax credit proposal would be based on an existing film and television tax credit program that his office says has generated more than $26bn since it was introduced in 2009. Last October, the governor announced a plan to extend the scheme to $750m annually, more than doubling its $330m annual allocation.\n\nSome critics have questioned the effectiveness of such credits. In testimony to the state’s Senate Revenue and Taxation Committee in March, Michael Thom, a professor at the University of Southern California who studies the financial implications of state incentives to attract the film industry, said such initiatives “fail to stimulate enough economic activity to justify their substantial cost”.\n\n“Simply put, California cannot afford the existing incentive, much less a substantial expansion to it,” he said.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nTrump tariffs\nGavin Newsom\nDonald Trump\nFilm industry\nTariffs\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/06/newsom-trump-movie-tariffs","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Robert Tait","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:45:19.407Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Officials say black bear likely killed man and his dog in Florida","content":"Wildlife officials in Florida are investigating what is believed to be the first fatal mauling of a human by a bear in the state.\n\nThe body of the black bear suspected in the death of 89-year-old Robert Markel was removed from woodland near the unincorporated community of Jerome, close to Florida’s Big Cypress wildlife management area, on Monday night, according to the Naples Daily News.\n\nRangers were called to the area shortly after 7.15am on Monday when Markel’s daughter reported that she witnessed a bear killing his dog, said George Reynaud, spokesperson for the Florida fish and wildlife conservation commission (FWC), at a press conference on Monday.\n\nHe said Markel’s body was found “a couple of hundred yards away” from the dog. “We do know it was a bear attack. We don’t know if it was the same bear or multiple bears,” he said.\n\nReynaud said that rangers had set traps in the woodland during the day on Monday, and a search team of about 10 was searching the area on foot, as well as using drones. He warned the public to stay away from the area.\n\n“Lethal force is a last resort but we are armed to address that,” another FWC spokesperson, Tyler Matthews, told the press conference.\n\nThe commission has recorded 43 human-bear encounters in Florida dating back to 2006, excluding vehicle strikes, and almost all of them also involving a dog. Markel’s death would be the first fatality in the state attributed to a bear mauling, if that was found to be his cause of death.\n\nMatthews told the Naples Daily News that the carcass of the bear in Monday’s incident was being transported to Gainesville for a necropsy. The Guardian has contacted FWC for further comment.\n\nThe only other recorded encounter in Florida this year between a bear and human was in Marion, in the state’s north-east region, in February, involving an adult female and her cub.\n\nFlorida has more than 4,000 black bears, with a sizable population in south-west Florida, and in and around the Big Cypress natural area.\n\nOnce a threatened species, with only 300-500 statewide in the 1970s because of habitat loss and unregulated hunting, black bear numbers have rebounded in recent years.\n\nHunting was banned in 1994, but the Florida legislature authorized a limited hunt in 2015, and FWC has proposed issuing permits for the hunting of another 187 bears later this year. The move sparked a backlash from wildlife advocates and a petition with more than 31,000 signatures.\n\nIn June of last year, Florida’s Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, signed a bill loosening protections for black bears. Legislators approved the measure after hearing a state congressman, Jason Shoaf, insist without evidence that black bears high on crack cocaine were breaking into people’s homes and destroying property.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nFlorida\nAnimals\nWildlife\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/06/black-bear-mauling-florida","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Richard Luscombe","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:45:20.939Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Columbia University to cut 180 jobs due to federal grant revocations","content":"New York’s Columbia University is slated to cut 180 staffers whose work was supported by federal grants that have now been revoked by the Trump administration, the college’s acting president, Claire Shipman, announced on Tuesday.\n\n“We have had to make difficult choices and unfortunately, today, nearly 180 of our colleagues who have been working, in whole or in part, on impacted federal grants, will receive notices of non-renewal or termination,” Shipman said in a lengthy notice posted on Columbia’s website.\n\nStaff cuts follow the cancellation of $400m in federal grants and contracts to Columbia University because of what the Trump administration alleges is the college’s failure to protect students from antisemitic harassment.\n\nThe new definition of antisemitism is transforming America – and serving a Christian nationalist plan\nRead more\n\nThe university later yielded to a series of changes demanded by the administration, including setting up a new disciplinary committee and initiating investigations into students critical of Israel and the war in Gaza.\n\nShipman said elsewhere in the notice that the university was continuing discussions with the federal government on funding to resume research activity.\n\n“We are working on and planning for every eventuality, but the strain in the meantime, financially and on our research mission, is intense,” Shipman wrote, adding that the university was adjusting and in some cases reducing “expenditures based on current financial realities” as it pursues alternative sources of funding.\n\nShipman said the cuts represented about 20% of the individuals who are funded in part by the terminated grants.\n\n”We do not make these decisions lightly. We are deeply committed, at Columbia, to the critical work of invention, innovation and discovery,” she said. “Increasing budget constraints combined with uncertainty related to future levels of federal funding for research … requires us to make difficult choices.\n\n“We have had to make deliberate, considered decisions about the allocation of our financial resources. Those decisions also impact our greatest resource, our people. We understand this news will be hard.”\n\nEarlier this year, Columbia acquiesced to administration demands that laid out measures including banning face masks on campus, empowering security officers to remove or arrest individuals, and taking control of the department that offers courses on the Middle East from its faculty.\n\nskip past newsletter promotion\n\nSign up to This Week in Trumpland\n\nFree newsletter\n\nA deep dive into the policies, controversies and oddities surrounding the Trump administration\n\nEnter your email address\nSign up\nPrivacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.\n\nafter newsletter promotion\n\nBut the agreement did not automatically lead to a restoration of federal research funding. Despite a $14bn endowment fund, Columbia said on Tuesday that “federal actions” required it to look across all areas of the university for to cut costs.\n\nThe university also said it had developed programs to streamline its workforce through attrition, planned to launch a voluntary retirement incentive program, make cuts to administrative expenditures, and “continue to make prudent budget decisions that will ensure long-term financial stability across the university”.\n\n“This is a deeply challenging time across all higher education, and we are attempting to navigate through tremendous ambiguity with precision, which will be imperfect at times,” Shipman wrote.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nColumbia University\nTrump administration\nUS campus protests\nUS universities\nHigher education\nProtest\nGaza\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/06/columbia-university-job-cuts-grants-trump","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Edward Helmore","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:45:24.430Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Federal judge says Democrat’s North Carolina election win must stand","content":"North Carolina election officials must certify Democrat Allison Riggs as the winner of a state supreme court election, a federal judge ruled on Monday, a significant development in the only race that has remained undecided from last year.\n\nRiggs, who currently sits on the court, defeated Jefferson Griffin, a Republican appellate judge, by 734 votes last November. Multiple recounts confirmed her win. But after election day, Griffin challenged more than 60,000 votes, mostly in Democratic-leaning counties, saying that election officials had wrongly allowed them to count.\n\nRichard Myers II, a district judge and Trump appointee, agreed with Riggs and said that Griffin was essentially trying to change the rules of the election after election day.\n\nDemocrat accuses Republicans of ‘power grab’ in North Carolina voting rights cases\nRead more\n\n“This case concerns whether the federal constitution permits a state to alter the rules of an election after the fact and apply those changes retroactively to only a select group of voters, and in so doing treat those voters differently than other similarly situated individuals. This case is also about whether a state may redefine its class of eligible voters but offer no process to those who may have been misclassified as ineligible,” Myers wrote in his opinion. “To this court, the answer to each of those questions is ‘no.’”\n\nGriffin’s challenges focused on three groups of voters. The largest was tens of thousands of people whose voter records lacked a driver’s license number or the last four digits of their social security numbers. A few thousand more were overseas voters who had failed to provide photo ID. There was also a smaller group of voters who were labeled “never residents” – people who had turned 18 while living abroad and claimed North Carolina as their residence.\n\nIt was clear from the start that many of the challenged voters were eligible to cast a ballot. Riggs’ parents were among those challenged. The Guardian and other news outlets spoke to several challenged “never residents” who said they were temporarily abroad, had lived in North Carolina, and were confused about why they were being challenged.\n\nWhat was seen as a quixotic effort quickly turned into concern for voting advocates when the North Carolina court of appeals ruled in Griffin’s favor, saying more than 60,000 voters had to prove their eligibility. The North Carolina supreme court later narrowed the number of ballots at issue to around 1,500.\n\nThe fact that courts were even willing to entertain a post-election effort to challenge rules set well in advance of voting, experts said, is an alarming development and may lay out a playbook to overturn future elections.\n\n“You establish the rules before the game. You don’t change them after the game is done,” Myers wrote. He also paused his opinion for seven days to give Griffin a chance to appeal. Griffin’s campaign told the Associated Press Monday night they were evaluating the ruling.\n\n“Today, we won. I’m proud to continue upholding the constitution and the rule of law as North Carolina’s supreme court justice,” Riggs said in a statement.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nUS politics\nThe fight for democracy\nNorth Carolina\nUS elections 2024\nRepublicans\nDemocrats\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/06/north-carolina-supreme-court-election-ruling","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Sam Levine","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:45:28.813Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Why Europe needs a common defence fund – outside the EU","content":"O\nf all the shocks to have hit Europe over the past three months, none is more devastating than the realisation that the continent may no longer be able to count on a US security guarantee. Even if Donald Trump’s disdain for Europe had been telegraphed well in advance, few could have imagined a world in which a US president would publicly humiliate the head of state of a European ally in the Oval Office, cut off intelligence sharing in the middle of a war, or cook up a one-sided peace deal with Russia over the heads of Kyiv and its European allies.\n\nWhat has made the shock worse is the brutal revelation of Europe’s inability to defend its own interests. Even as European leaders plead with Trump that a peace without robust security guarantees for Ukraine is no peace at all, their position is fatally weakened by the fact that they are in no position to provide those security guarantees themselves. When JD Vance and Pete Hegseth accused Europeans of being pathetic freeloaders in a leaked chat, the barb was all the more hurtful because it was partly true. Britain and France have struggled even to put together a “coalition of the willing” that can provide a bare-bones peacekeeping force, let alone make up for the loss of critical US air defence and battlefield intelligence should America withdraw entirely.\n\nThe only conclusion to draw from this confrontation with geopolitical reality is that Europe urgently needs to address its defensive deficiencies – and the good news is that this is now widely accepted. Almost all European Nato members have committed to hit the 2% of GDP defence spending target this year. Germany has relaxed its debt brake to allow for up to €1tn (£850bn) of extra defence spending over the next four years. The EU has created a mechanism to allow member states to borrow cheaply to fund defence and has tweaked its fiscal rules to exempt defence spending from calculations of national debt.\n\nThe bad news is that this is not enough. The Nato secretary general, Mark Rutte, has said alliance members are going to need to raise their defence spending to “considerably more” than 3% of GDP. What’s more, tweaks to fiscal rules and cheap loans will not help many highly indebted EU countries for whom the hard constraint on their borrowing is the bond market: any interest saving from accessing EU loans is likely to be wiped out by higher interest charges on the rest of their debt. Meanwhile, no European country on its own is going to supply the “strategic enablers” that are currently provided by the Americans.\n\nBut there is a way forward for Europe – and whether Europeans choose to take it is a critical test of the continent’s seriousness that it cannot afford to flunk. An important new paper published by Bruegel, a Brussels-based thinktank, offers a compelling proposal for a European defence mechanism, essentially a common defence fund that would be open to any country that wished to join, which could over time transform the defence capabilities of the continent. Indeed, this plan, which has been devised by three highly regarded economists, Guntram Wolff, Armin Steinbach and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, may be the only realistic way of doing so.\n\nThe plan is especially compelling because it addresses all the key challenges facing any European rearmament plan. First and foremost, it would be independent of the EU. That means it would be open to some of the continent’s key defence players such as Britain, Norway and Switzerland, who are not EU members, while excluding those EU members whose constitutionally enshrined neutrality complicates their participation in common defence initiatives. And unlike the EU, it would not be vulnerable to vetoes by countries such as Hungary, whose government does not share the same values.\n\nSecond, this defence mechanism would operate as a rearmament bank, which would borrow in the markets through the issuance of bonds to buy weapons on behalf of its members, but whose debts crucially would stay off national balance sheets until the members took delivery of them at a time of their own choosing. And to the extent that the fund bought public goods such as satellite systems or a common European air defence, these could be paid for by annual service charges, without adding to the fiscal pressures on individual governments.\n\nskip past newsletter promotion\n\nSign up to This is Europe\n\nFree weekly newsletter\n\nThe most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment\n\nEnter your email address\nSign up\nPrivacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.\n\nafter newsletter promotion\n\nEU leaders talk the talk on defence. But where will they find the billions to pay for it?\nPaul Taylor\nRead more\n\nThird, the mechanism could overcome one of the biggest problems in the European defence market, which is its high degree of fragmentation, reinforced by a strong home bias in procurement. The result is too many products, order sizes that are too small and too little competition, leading to higher prices. Even large countries often order products in small quantities. Since 2022, Germany has ordered just 123 Leopard 2 tanks to be delivered by 2030. Meanwhile, European countries operate 12 different main battle tanks, while the US has one.\n\nAs things stand, the EU has been unable to overcome this fragmentation. That’s because the EU treaties contain a specific carve-out from single market rules (article 346) for the defence sector. It makes any EU scheme for common procurement based on competitive tenders and non-discrimination legally unenforceable.\n\nBut since the proposed European defence mechanism would be based on a non-EU intergovernmental treaty, it would not be subject to this opt-out. Pooled orders for the equipment that is likely to be needed in the coming years would give European governments far greater bang for their rearmament buck.\n\nBetter still, the prospect of a single European deep-pocketed bidder would give the European defence industry the incentive to invest in technologies that are now only available in the US market. These include fifth-generation fighter jets, certain air-defence systems, rocket artillery systems similar to the US Himars and heavy transport helicopters. That would enable Europeans to reduce their reliance on US systems.\n\nIt is true that what is being proposed will force governments to confront tough choices. For Britain, which quit the EU less than a decade ago, it would be a giant step back towards European integration. For countries such as Germany and the Netherlands, which have long resisted common European borrowing, it would mean overcoming a political taboo. Many smaller countries will worry about the risks to their national defence manufacturing sectors.\n\nBut if Europe is to have any chance of remaining a pole in the fast-emerging multipolar world, what other choice does it have? Indeed, the real danger is that it may already be too late.\n\nSimon Nixon is a journalist and economics commentator\n\nExplore more on these topics\nEurope\nOpinion\nUkraine\nEuropean Union\nRussia\nDefence policy\nMilitary\nTrump administration\ncomment\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2025/may/06/europe-needs-common-defence-fund-outside-eu","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:46:09.712Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"UK business activity falls for the first time since October 2023; US trade deficit hits record; FTSE 100’s record run continues – as it happened","content":"Show key events only\nFrom 8h ago\n09.41 BST\nUK business activity falls for the first time since October 2023 as trade tensions hurt economy\n\nNewsflash: Business activity across the UK has fallen for the first time in 18 months, as trade war fears batter the British economy.\n\nThe latest poll of purchasing managers at UK service sector companies has found that business activity declined in April, ending a 17-month run of growth, and pulling the wider private sector into a contraction.\n\nNew order books at services companies shrank last month, driven by the fastest decline in exports since February 2021, when the Covid-19 pandemic was hitting activity.\n\nData provider S&P Global says that “survey respondents widely commented on risk aversion and delayed spending decisions among clients in response to rising global economic uncertainty.”\n\nThis dragged the S&P Global UK Services PMI Business Activity Index down to 49.0 in April, down from 52.5 in March, which is the lowest reading since January 2023. Any reading below 50 signals a contraction.\n\nThe PMI report says:\n\nWhile many firms continued to report unfavourable domestic demand conditions, the latest survey indicated a particularly marked decline in new work from overseas markets.\n\nThe rate of contraction was the steepest for just over four years and mostly linked by survey respondents to the impact of rising global trade tensions.\n\nS&P Global also reports that the wider UK private sector also contracted last month.\n\nIts UK PMI Composite Output Index, which also tracks the manufacturing industry, fell to 48.5 in April, down from 51.5 in March and below the 50.0 no-change value for the first time in one-and-a-half years.\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n09.42 BST\n1h ago\n16.48 BST\nClosing post\n\nTime to recap…\n\nA 17-month period of expansion in the UK’s services sector came to an abrupt end in April as uncertainty created by Donald Trump’s tariff war hit new orders and exports.\n\nA poll of purchasing managers in services businesses showed that the US president’s tariff campaign had sent a chill through the sector, which accounts for about three-quarters of the UK economy, hitting business confidence about the prospects for the years ahead.\n\nService sector export sales were particularly subdued, with total new work from abroad decreasing at the fastest pace since February 2021, during the Covid pandemic.\n\nSmaller domestic services companies also said tax increases introduced by the chancellor, Rachel Reeves, were weighing on costs and had led to them laying off workers at a faster rate in April.\n\nAt 49.0 in April, down from 52.5 in March, the headline seasonally adjusted S&P Global UK services PMI activity index was the lowest since January 2023. A score of more than 50.0 represents expansion.\n\nUK services sector shrinks for first time in 17 months amid Trump tariff fears\nRead more\n\nIn other news…\n\nThe US trade deficit has widened to a record level in March, as American companies scrambled to import goods before new tariffs came into effect.\n\nBritain and India have agreed a long-desired trade deal that ministers said would add £4.8bn a year to the UK economy by 2040.\n\nThe deal promises a boon for the UK’s car and alcohol industries, which have suffered from the impact of Donald Trump’s tariffs in the US.\n\nIndia’s tariffs on British whisky and gin will be halved from 150% to 75% before reducing to 40% by the 10th year of the deal, according to the business department.\n\nUK and India agree ‘landmark’ trade deal after three years of negotiations\nRead more\n\nUK car sales have dropped 10% in April, a decline blamed on “a fragile economic backdrop and weakened consumer confidence.\n\nFord, Mattel and Ferrari have all warned that tariffs will eat into their profits.\n\nBarbie maker raises prices due to Trump tariffs as Ford warns of $1.5bn cost\nRead more\n\nThe Irish government revised down its economic outlook as global trade uncertainty caused by US President Donald Trump’s tariff tirade threatens growth.\n\nCanada is likely to fall into recession this year due to the US trade war, ratings agency Fitch warned.\n\nShare\n1h ago\n16.40 BST\nFTSE 100's record run continues\n\nThe UK stock market’s longest running winning streak on record just got a little longer!\n\nThe FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares in London has ended the day up one point, or 0.07%, at 8597 points.\n\nThat means the Footsie has now risen for 16 sessions in a row, extending the record set at the end of last week.\n\nGold miners led the FTSE 100 risers today, with Endeavour Mining up 5,2% and Fresnillo gaining 4.7%, followed by supermarket chain Sainsbury’s (3.4%).\n\nThis rally means the FTSE 100 has recovered all the losses it suffered in early April, when it plunged to just 7,544 points in the market panic after Donald Trump’s “Liberation Day” tariff announcement.\n\nThe recovery began when the president u-turned, and delayed most tariffs for 90 days.\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n16.40 BST\n1h ago\n16.33 BST\n\nTreasury Secretary Scott Bessent has said today that the U.S. is in the midst of negotiations with 17 of the country’s largest trading partners, Fox Business report.\n\nIn testimony to the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government, Bessent explained that the timing of trade deals “will be path dependent on our trade partners.”\n\nHe added:\n\n“As I’ve said before, there are 18 very important trading relationships. We are currently negotiating with 17 of those trading partners. China we have not engaged in negotiations with as of yet.”\n\n“Approximately 97% or 98% of our trade deficit is with 15 countries, 18% of the countries are major trading partners, and I would be surprised if we don’t have more than 80% or 90% of those wrapped up by the end of the year.”\n\nShare\n2h ago\n15.52 BST\n\nWith around 40 minutes trading to go, it’s nip-and-tuck whether the London stock market will extend its record-breaking run.\n\nThe FTSE 100, which has risen for the last 15 sessions, is curently down 2 points today at 8593 points.\n\nSo shortly after 4.30pm today, after the closing auction, we’ll know if the rally has faltered…\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n16.11 BST\n2h ago\n15.39 BST\n\nBack in Frankfurt, stocks are recovering after Friedrich Merz won a second vote to become the next German chancellor, a few hours after dramatically losing the first vote.\n\nThe DAX is now down just 0.4%. The euro has pushed a little higher too – now up half a cent against the US dollar at $1.136.\n\nGermany’s Merz confirmed as chancellor in second vote following first round humiliation – as it happened\nRead more\nShare\n3h ago\n15.11 BST\n\nUK lender Nationwide has announced cuts to its mortgage deals – perhaps anticipating the Bank of England lowering borrowing costs on Thursday.\n\nNationwide is trimming up to 0.3 percentage points off some mortgage products, which means rates now start at 3.84%.\n\nThe cuts mean Nationwide is now offering sub-4% first-time buyer rates for first time since September 2024.\n\nIt’s lowest first-time buyer rate is 3.94% and available on a two-year fixed rate product at 60% loan-to-value (LTV) with a £1,499 fee.\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n15.46 BST\n3h ago\n15.09 BST\n\nIreland is bracing for a growth slowdown if Donald Trump maintains tariffs on the European Union.\n\nIreland’s finance ministry has issued new forecasts, showing that growth in Ireland’s domestic economy is expected to slow to 2% this year if a 10% tariff on U.S. imports from the European Union remains in place or 2.5% if tariffs are removed.\n\nShare\n3h ago\n14.43 BST\n\nWall Street has opened in the red, with the main indices all lower in early trading.\n\nDow Jones industrial average: down 273 points, or 0.66%, at 40,945 points\n\nS&P 500: down 39 points, or 0.7%, at 5,611 points\n\nNasdaq composite: down 160 points, or 0.9%, at 17,684 points\n\nShare\n3h ago\n14.29 BST\nFitch: trade war will push Canada into recession this year\n\nRatings agency Fitch is predicting that the trade war with the US will push Canada into recession this year, and push up unemployment.\n\nIn a new report today, Fitch warns that “due to the impact of U.S. tariffs, we forecast a recession” – a blow to new prime minister Mark Carney.\n\nFitch predicts that Canadian GDP will declining for three-quarters, starting in April-June this year, with annual average growth in 2025 of just 0.1%.\n\nThe agency adds:\n\nThe rapidly changing tariff and trade landscape in the U.S. will both directly affect Canadian exports and also indirectly via slower U.S. GDP growth. This will have an adverse effect on the labour market; Fitch expects the unemployment rate to rise to over 8%.\n\nShare\n3h ago\n14.20 BST\nUK and India clinch trade deal\nView image in fullscreen\nIndian Minister of Commerce and Industry Piyush Goyal (right) and Britain's Secretary of State for Business and Trade Jonathan Reynolds (left) during a visit to New Delhi, India, in February this year Photograph: Anushree Fadnavis/Reuters\n\nBritain has secured its biggest trade agreement since Brexit, by agreeing a free trade deal with India.\n\nBritain’s business department says the deal, just announced, is a “huge economic win” for the UK, and will cut Indian tariffs on key products such as whisky, cosmetics and medical devices.\n\nThe deal is expected to increase bilateral trade by £25.5bn “in the long run” (which I think means by 2040).\n\nBusiness and Trade Secretary Jonathan Reynolds says:\n\n“By striking a new trade deal with the fastest-growing economy in the world, we are delivering billions for the UK economy and wages every year and unlocking growth in every corner of the country, from advanced manufacturing in the North East to whisky distilleries in Scotland.\n\n“In times of global uncertainty, a pragmatic approach to global trade that provides businesses and consumers with stability is more important than ever.”\n\nUnder the deal, India’s tariffs on UK whisky and gins will be halved from 150% to 75% before reducing to 40% by year ten of the deal, while automotive tariffs will go from over 100% to 10% under a quota.\n\nOther UK goods with reduced tariffs include cosmetics, aerospace, lamb, medical devices, salmon, electrical machinery, soft drinks, chocolate, and biscuits.\n\nIn return, the UK will cut tariffs on Indian producs including clothes, footwear, and food products including frozen prawns.\n\nIndia’s prime minister Narendra Modi has also hailed the deal, saying:\n\n“These landmark agreements will further deepen our comprehensive strategic partnership, and catalyse trade, investment, growth, job creation, and innovation in both our economies.”\n\nDelighted to speak with my friend PM @Keir_Starmer. In a historic milestone, India and the UK have successfully concluded an ambitious and mutually beneficial Free Trade Agreement, along with a Double Contribution Convention. These landmark agreements will further deepen our…\n\n— Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) May 6, 2025\nShare\n4h ago\n13.42 BST\nUS trade deficit hits record amid pre-trade war stockpiling\n\nJust in: New data confirms that the US trade deficit rose to a record level in March.\n\nAmerica’s total goods and services deficit increased by $17.3bn to $140.5bn in March, up from $123.2 billion in February, the US censud bureau reports.\n\nThe increase was due to a 4.4% rise in imports in March, to $419bn, while US exports were only 0.2% higher at $278.5bn.\n\nThe increase in imports may be due to companies trying to stock up before the White House imposed new tariffs on goods from abroad in April.\n\nThe report shows that imports of consumer goods increased by $22.5bn, while capital goods imports rose by $3.7bn, computer accessories were up $2bn and automotive vehicles, parts, and engine shipments increased by $2.6bn.\n\nThe report also shows that the US achieved budget surpluses with Netherlands ($4.5bn), South and Central America ($3.2bn), Hong Kong ($1.9bn), United Kingdom ($1.2bn), Singapore ($500m), Brazil ($500m), and Saudi Arabia ($200m).\n\nBut beficits were recorded with the European Union ($48.3bn), Ireland ($29.3bn), China ($24.8bn), Mexico ($16.8bn), Switzerland ($14.7bn), Vietnam ($14.1bn), Taiwan ($8.7bn), India ($7.7bn), Germany ($7.5bn), South Korea ($6.8bn), Japan ($5.8bn), Canada ($4.9bn), Italy ($4.4bn), France ($3.9bn), Malaysia ($3.2bn), Australia ($1.0bn), Israel ($1.0bn), and Belgium ($100m).\n\nShare\nUpdated at \n14.02 BST\n4h ago\n13.35 BST\nView image in fullscreen\n Photograph: Daniele Mascolo/Reuters\n\nLuxury car maker Ferrari has joined the pack of auto companies warning that the US trade war could hurt its earnings.\n\nFerrari reported a 13% rise in revenues in the first three months of this year, with operating profit up 23%.\n\n“Another year is off to a great start” said Benedetto Vigna, CEO of Ferrari, explaining:\n\n“In the first quarter of 2025, with very few incremental shipments year on year, all key metrics recorded double-digit growth, underscoring a strong profitability driven by our product mix and continued demand for personalizations.\n\nVigna added that Ferrari is “very excited about what lies ahead.”\n\nBut that roadmap includes the threat of tariffs – and Ferrari warns that the introduction of import tariffs on EU cars into the USA could knock 50 basis points (half a percentage point) off its profitability percentage margins this year.\n\nShare\n1 of 3\nNext\nOldest\nExplore more on these topics\nBusiness\nBusiness live\nStock markets\nFTSE\nOil\nCommodities\nAutomotive industry\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2025/may/06/trade-war-china-service-sector-uk-eurozone-ford-tariffs-bp-shell-oil-business-live-news","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:46:33.562Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"‘A game-killer’: Trump tariffs add to mounting troubles for borderland cattle ranchers","content":"B\nandannas veiled ranchers’ mouths and noses, shielding them from heavy dust clouds kicked up by the Mexican herds of cattle crossing the United States-Mexico border. The scene looks timeless, routine. The uncertainty isn’t.\n\nIn Donald Trump’s first 100 days, the borderland’s cattle industry faces a huge challenge: threats of a trade war that’s already hitting consumers in the gut with rising beef prices, from Texas to New York. The on-again, off-again tariff impositions and worries in February and March jolted Mexican cattle producers with mounting economic losses.\n\n“The tariffs, it’s a game-killer,” said Daniel Manzanares, director of Unión Ganadera Regional de Chihuahua, the Regional Livestock Union of Chihuahua.\n\nThe unpredictability of the US president’s tariff policy on Mexico earlier this year has already cost ranchers millions of dollars in profit losses, according to Manzanares.\n\n“It was horrible …” he said. “They’re trying to get that money back, but I doubt they’ll ever be able to.”\n\nRecently, most of the 1,300 cattle moved north that day for fattening in feed pens before final transformation into steak, burgers and meatballs for US consumers. But that could soon end.\n\nFree trade agreements protect around half of all goods coming from Mexico into the US, including beef. But for many in the industry, the uncertainty surrounding federal US policies has ranchers spooked.\n\n“It doesn’t really matter at this point in terms of what the exemptions even are,” said Alex Durante, senior economist at the DC-based thinktank Tax Foundation. The Trump administration “has been behaving so erratically that it’s in general very difficult for businesses to invest in this environment”.\n\nCattle imports from Mexico’s sprawling border state of Chihuahua remain crucial to the US livestock economy, especially with a US beef shortage and the highest ever beef prices, say ranchers from Unión Ganadera.\n\nThe cost of maintaining one of the nation’s most vital industries had already become precarious. A parasitic screwworm outbreak, a devastating drought and personnel shortages at US ports of entry already plagued the system.\n\nWhile Trump’s trade policy continues to evolve, his administration’s break with decades of American free trade policy threatens to unravel a long-established system of cross-border trade that is embedded in the very name of El Paso del Norte – the Pass of the North.\n\nChaos at the border\n\nThe tariff chaos in Mexico in early February and March provided a glimpse into the potential collapse of US-Mexico free trade.\n\nOn 1 February, Trump announced a 25% tariff on all goods from Mexico. During February alone, the tariff scare (along with a preceding pest outbreak) caused $3m in losses for ranchers, said Alvaro Bustillos, president of Vaquero Trading in Santa Teresa.\n\nThose same tariffs were paused in March before being reinstated on 2 April for “liberation day”. One week after Trump’s April announcement, tariffs on Mexican goods were paused once again, further adding to the unpredictability of US economic policy.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nCattle wait in pens at the port of entry in Santa Teresa, New Mexico. Photograph: Gibran Caroline Boyce for Puente News Collaborative\n\nMarco Herrera, a US customs broker with private agency Capin-Vyborny, and his team are responsible for issuing documents for imports and ensuring buyers and sellers comply with tariff regulations. The Trump administration’s tariff announcement in February sent panic through border industries and stalled cattle crossings.\n\nAfter Trump announced the tariffs, customs brokers, buyers and sellers were unprepared to implement them with only 48 hours’ notice, Herrera said. He abruptly drove 10 hours back from California to New Mexico after first hearing about it on social media. He said the White House did not share formal guidance as to what products would be affected in advance.\n\n“The sellers and buyers didn’t understand who was responsible for paying the tariffs,” Herrera said. “The buyer was telling the seller, ‘You’re responsible.’ The seller was telling the buyer, ‘You’re responsible.’ Under US customs law, the responsible party is the buyer. The consumer in the US is who will absorb the costs.”\n\nAs US consumers slowly begin to feel the costs, the first victims are cattle ranchers in Mexico. The $600m-plus industry is the third-largest economic pillar in Chihuahua. Across the border, New Mexico processes nearly a third of all cattle imported from Mexico annually.\n\nMore than 90% of cattle producers with the Unión Ganadera Regional de Chihuahua are small ranchers who have about 10 to 15 cattle available for the entire year.\n\nMeat prices in the US have been steadily increasing over the years. Data from the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) shows prices for sirloin steak in the US increased from a little over $10 a pound in March 2023 to nearly $12 a pound in March 2025. During that same time period, ground beef prices rose from almost $5 a pound to almost $6 a pound.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nNewly arrived feeder steers and spayed heifers are branded with an ‘M’ for Mexico on their right hip. The branding is for cattle that are unable to breed. Photograph: Gibran Caroline Boyce for Puente News Collaborative\n\nThe threat of tariffs against Mexico has alarmed some ranchers who fear losing money if they send cattle across the border, despite some protections for certain goods under the US-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), including livestock. Implemented in 2020 during the first Trump administration, the USMCA replaced the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta).\n\nManzanares said many ranchers had already “canceled their border crossing date”, because they “didn’t want to take a chance of having $500 a head taken away”. He said hundreds of dollars were lost per animal after tariffs went into effect. “It’s a damn outright steal,” he said referring to the tariffs.\n\nTrump is pushing high import taxes as his solution to boosting US industries and protecting US jobs. The move, Herrera said, will instead end up directly hurting agricultural workers and US consumers.\n\n“With 25% tariffs, Mexican producers are no longer going to want to do business through US ports of entry,” said Herrera on the tariff chaos in February. “Instead of making money, we’re losing money … We’re going to lose our jobs. There’s not going to be enough cattle for all the US customs brokers, the buyers, the transportation companies.”\n\nAmid these growing fears, in February and March, Trump issued pauses. Following March’s 30-day reprieve, he announced on 2 April an additional 10% baseline tariff on all goods imported into the country, as well as reciprocal tariffs on countries with trade surpluses with the US. The reciprocal tariffs remain paused for 90 days, but the 10% tax still stands.\n\nAn environmental crisis\n\nTariffs are just the latest setback for border ranchers. Even before the trade war, a prolonged drought, rising inflation and a screwworm parasite outbreak disrupted much of the cattle industry along the US-Mexico border.\n\nBustillo calls it “the most complicated times” the Chihuahua cattle industry has ever faced.\n\nThe northern part of Mexico has had a drought since late 2022, affecting 76% of the country – roughly 98 million people. The resulting diminished forage is forcing many ranchers to purchase more feed, raising the costs of maintaining their herds of cattle. This has shrunk the producers’ herds, many of whom are already smaller ranchers.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nCattle from all over the Mexican state of Chihuahua enter the US at the Santa Teresa-San Jerónimo border crossing in New Mexico. Photograph: Sandra Sadek/Sandra Sadek / Puente News Collaborative\n\nThe outbreak of a parasitic fly pest known as the “New World screwworm’’ exacerbated the ranchers’ plight.\n\nThe screwworm lives off the flesh of living mammals. Usually found in Central America, the parasite made its way to Mexico in late 2024, despite efforts by the local authorities to contain it. The cattle cross-border trade between the US and Mexico was completely shut down between November and December due to the outbreak.\n\nAs a result, Mexican cattle ranchers implemented more sanitary measures to meet new USDA requirements to continue bringing their cattle north. All USDA inspections must now be completed on Mexican soil, which means only five of the original 12 ports are active at this time.\n\nAdditionally, according to Herrera, mass firings at USDA by Elon Musk’s so-called “department of government efficiency” (Doge), accompanied by an indefinite hiring freeze of specialized inspectors and technicians, have kept ports of entry shuttered to cattle crossings. This includes one in the neighboring border town of Columbus, New Mexico, due to a lack of personnel to perform the inspections.\n\nAt remaining ports, like the one in Santa Teresa, Bustillos of Vaquero Trading, said inspection bottlenecks continue.\n\n“All these [Mexican] states want to come through our crossing ports and we only have limited capacity to get [the herds] across,” Bustillos said. “We’re working at 50% capacity now.”\n\nWith months of border closures and tightened cattle inspections, any further hurdles, like tariffs, threaten to compound already stark losses.\n\n“We have the door to the best market in the world, one that pays the highest premiums,” Bustillos said. “I don’t think there’s a place in the whole world that has the prices of steaks or beef like the United States has. [The US] brings a lot of value to the industry.”\n\nThat open door to the world’s best beef market may not remain open much longer.\n\n“It’s a downright shame what’s happening,” Manzanares added.“Our best friends are Canada to the North, Mexico to the South. It does not bode well for us on a global level for trade.”\n\nThis story was produced for Puente News Collaborative in partnership with the Craig Newmark Graduate School of Journalism at the City University of New York (Cuny)\n\nExplore more on these topics\nTrump tariffs\nCattle\nNew Mexico\nMexico\nAmericas\nTariffs\nfeatures\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/06/trump-tariffs-cattle-ranchers-mexico","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:46:56.043Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Trump and Carney to meet at White House in closely watched encounter","content":"Canada’s prime minister, Mark Carney, was due to meet with the US president, Donald Trump, on Tuesday in a closely watched encounter at the White House that could hint at the future relationship between the two countries and their two leaders.\n\nOver the weekend, Trump said it was “highly unlikely” he would use military force to annex Canada, a key trading partner and political ally. In recent months, the president has repeatedly threatened to use economic coercion to weaken Canada to the point that it accedes to Trump’s wish to make it the 51st state.\n\n“I think we’re not ever going to get to that point, something could happen with Greenland … I don’t see it with Canada, I just don’t see it, I have to be honest with you,” he said.\n\nCarney crafted much of his federal election campaign on Canada’s collective outrage over the US president’s threats to the nation’s sovereignty. During his victory speech last week, Carney used one of his campaign’s most frequently delivered lines, telling exuberant supporters Trump wanted to “break us, so that America can own us”.\n\n“That will never, ever happen,” he added, to shouts from the crowd.\n\nCarney also used his first post-election press conference to once again quash any idea Canada was interested in becoming the 51st US state, a proposal repeatedly floated by Trump.\n\n“It’s always important to distinguish want from reality,” Carney said on Friday.\n\nColin Robertson, a former senior Canadian diplomat who has had numerous postings in the US, said Trump’s relatively cordial tone since the election bodes well for the Canadian delegation and makes an Oval Office ambush less likely.\n\nRobertson speculated that Trump’s background as a property developer has helped frame his perception of Carney – who he last week referred to as a “very nice gentleman”.\n\n“Anybody I met in real estate, their favourite people are bankers. I suspect that immediately, Trump will look at Carney as a kind of ‘super banker’ and see him in a positive light,” he said.\n\n“And Carney’s also been very careful not to be personally critical of Trump, beyond talking about him that we’re a sovereign country, and this is how we’re doing stuff. That’s worked very well for him. He pushed back when Trump questioned our sovereignty, but that pushback would be something the president understands, because that’s how he behaves.”\n\nWhile much was made about Trump’s awkward handshake with Carney’s predecessor Justin Trudeau, the pair had a famously frosty relationship.\n\n‘Not everybody who voted for Carney quite knows what they got’: Canada eyes its new prime minister\nRead more\n\nIn Trudeau’s final days as prime minister, Trump repeatedly derided him as “governor” of Canada. And while the president had sometimes called the prime minister a “very nice guy”, Trump also called Trudeau “two-faced” after he was revealed on video leading the laughter at Trump’s expense at a Nato summit.\n\nStill, Carney’s “antagonistic” rhetoric towards Trump might be something he might regret when faced with the economic realities of Canada’s dependence on the United States, said Ryan Hurl, an assistant professor of political science at the University of Toronto.\n\n“I suspect he backs away from the idea that our relationship with the United States is ‘over’ and he might modify it to say that our relationship is ‘changing’,” said Hurl. “Trade negotiations are never completely static and hopefully he can present his negotiations with Trump as something that is better for Canada, and not simply as bending the knee to President Trump.”\n\nThe headwinds the prime minister faces in Tuesday’s White House meeting are already sufficiently strong, on both the economic and partisan fronts.\n\n“If Carney presents himself as making concessions to Trump to preserve the trading relationship between the two countries, the Conservative party will be able to take advantage of this,” said Hurl. “But if no agreements can be made, Canadians are going to start feeling the political the economic fallout very quickly.”\n\nCarney ran much of his brief federal election campaign on the idea that Canada needed to seek out new trade markets. And while a pledge to reshape Canada’s economic structure was welcomed by voters, many of the structural changes implied by such a policy shift – including eliminating internal trade barriers and getting more Canadian products to foreign markets – will take time. “You can’t just snap your fingers and change port capacity. That is a generational project,” said Hurl.\n\nMeanwhile, Trump is also starting to face domestic pressure: his decision to launch a trade war with allies and foes alike has started to harm him in public opinion as US companies warn they are prepared to raise costs for consumers.\n\n“Trump has probably overreached on trade issues and we’re really starting to see the pushback now. With questions over consumer confidence and the direction of the country, we can be part of the solution to Trump’s self-inflicted problem,” said Robertson.\n\nHe pointed to Canada’s “relatively strong” bargaining position as the two delegations meet at the White House.\n\nCanada’s federal government has invested in increased border checks, and fentanyl interceptions – the supposed pretext for Trump’s tariffs – have dropped further from a low starting point.\n\nTrade officials anticipate the United States will request changes to the USMCA free trade agreement, which is due for negotiations in 2026. And despite Trump’s repeated assertions that the United States doesn’t need Canada’s resources, experts say potash, steel and aluminum remain key purchases for American farmers and manufacturers.\n\n“And if, for example, they raise the issue of dairy and supply management, we can ask, ‘What do you want here? Do you want more access for dairy products? Because you’re not using your quota right now. And you also practice supply management when it comes to rice and sugar and cotton. So if you want to negotiate this, then we’ve got the process,” said Robertson. “At the end of the day, what’s really important about this meeting, as my kids would say, is the ‘vibe’ between the two. That’s almost more important than whatever processes are committed to moving forward.”\n\nThose close to the prime minister say he is approaching the meeting like he did during debate preparations in the federal election: preparing for all possible iterations of the unpredictable president.\n\n“With Trump, you’re just never sure on any day where he is, what’s going on in his head and who was the last person to talk to him before in the meeting,” said Robertson. “But one thing we know about Carney, he has always been two things: disciplined and prepared.”\n\nExplore more on these topics\nCanada\nMark Carney\nDonald Trump\nTrump administration\nUS foreign policy\nTrump tariffs\nAmericas\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/06/trump-carney-meeting-white-house","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Leyland Cecco","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:47:01.258Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Gold mining suspended in Peru’s north after 13 miners killed","content":"Peru’s president, Dina Boluarte, has suspended gold mining and announced a 12-hour curfew in Pataz, in the northern region, after criminals kidnapped and killed 13 gold mine workers.\n\nA Peruvian gold mining company La Poderosa said on Sunday that the bodies of 13 contract workers from a local firm had been found by police inside one of the mine’s tunnels.\n\nBoluarte told journalists on Monday that the “armed forces will take control of the area where La Poderosa operates”, but did not give further details about how the 30-day mining pause would be enforced.\n\nThe government response, which critics have called tardy and ineffective, comes amid outrage over the murder of the 13 men who had been held captive for more than a week by criminals believed linked to illegal mining. Police said the hostages were tortured and that video footage – allegedly recorded by the captors themselves – showed the miners were shot dead at point-blank range.\n\nIllegal gold mining has surged in Peru, Latin America’s biggest producer of the precious metal, just as the international price peaked once more at around $3,500 per ounce. Meanwhile a crime wave has swept the country with unprecedented rises in racketeering and killing-for-hire. 2024 saw a record increase murder rates – a 35.9% increase in homicides compared with 2023.\n\nTeacher murdered in front of schoolchildren as Lima gripped by crime wave\nRead more\n\n“Illegal mining is the most lucrative criminal activity in the country,” said César Ipenza, an environmental lawyer. Illegal gold mining accounted for $9bn , or 60% of Peru’s total laundered assets between January 2014 and October 2024, according to the country’s Financial Intelligence Unit, dwarfing the next biggest sources of laundered assets.\n\nOnce confined to certain zones illegal gold mining has spread throughout the country since the Covid-19 pandemic. The gold-rich area where the mine is located in La Libertad region has been under a state of emergency for more than two years due to ongoing violence and unrest.\n\nThis massacre brings to 39 the number of artisanal miners and workers killed by criminal gangs in Pataz, the company La Poderosa Mining confirmed in a statement.\n\n“The spiral of uncontrolled violence in Pataz is occurring despite the declaration of a state of emergency and the presence of a large police contingent which, unfortunately, has not been able to halt the deterioration of security conditions in the area,” the statement added.\n\nIn December, thousands of gold miners camped out in the downtown Lima and blocked the main highway to insist that the government maintain a registry of informal and illegal miners known as REINFO which protects them from prosecution.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nPeru\nAmericas\nMining\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/05/perus-north-miners-killed","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Dan Collyns","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:47:06.909Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Search for two young children missing in Canadian forest enters fourth day","content":"A frantic search for two children presumed lost in the unforgiving and thickly forested lands of Nova Scotia has entered its fourth day as police in Atlantic Canada expand their search.\n\nNearly 150 searchers have braved rain and fog to track down Lily Sullivan, six, and Jack Sullivan, four, who were last seen on Friday around their home in Pictou county, 100 miles north-east of Halifax.\n\nTheir mother Malehya Brooks-Murray and stepfather, Daniel Martell, have told local media they were sleeping with their 16-month-old baby on Friday morning as the older children played in the house. But when they awoke later in the morning, the two children were gone.\n\nThe Royal Canadian Mounted Police believe the pair, members of the Mi’kmaq First Nation community of Sipekne’katik, wandered off from their home and probably entered a heavily forested area.\n\nAmong the resources devoted to the effort have been dog teams with the heavy urban search and rescue team from Halifax, the region’s largest city, as well as thermal imaging cameras attached to drones. Police say their work has been “strategic and thorough” as they weigh any clues that might suggest a likely whereabouts for the children.\n\nThe search is also the first major undertaking by the Nova Scotia Guard, a newly formed a volunteer emergency organization meant to address shortfalls in the province’s response to crisis. In 2023, a flash flood killed four people, including three children – a tragedy that some residents believe could have been avoided by timely warnings sent by authorities.\n\nNova Scotia’s premier, Tim Houston, a resident of Pictou county, has visited the search headquarters alongside other local officials, to offer support for residents and searchers.\n\n“People in Pictou County and across Nova Scotia are praying for a positive outcome for two missing children,” he said in a statement. “During this time of worry, please know that our first responders and volunteers are working tirelessly during this 24/7 operation.”\n\nFoiled at times by inclement weather, more than a dozen search teams are in the field.\n\n“Everybody in the community is concerned and worried, but we’re all hoping for the best here,” said Donald Parker, a municipal councillor with the municipality of Pictou county told CBC News. “It’s hard on the whole community … It’s incredibly tough.”\n\nOn social media, the Sipekne’katik chief, Michelle Glasgow, questioned the decision not to issue an Amber alert, used when a child is presumed abducted, and said the disappearance underscored the need for a national alerting system.\n\n“Please help bring Jack and Lily home,” she wrote.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nCanada\nAmericas\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/05/canada-missing-children-nova-scotia","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Leyland Cecco","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:47:09.548Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Mexico’s president tries to defuse fears of US military intervention","content":"A sharp exchange of statements over the weekend has heightened concerns in Mexico that Donald Trump may push for a US military presence in its territory to fight drug trafficking.\n\nThe Mexican president, Claudia Sheinbaum, sought to defuse the situation in her daily press conference on Monday, emphasising that communication between the two leaders had been “very good” so far.\n\nBut the episode underlined the fraught path that Sheinbaum is navigating, as she attempts to placate Trump and protect the US-Mexico trade relationship while also defending Mexican sovereignty.\n\nOn Saturday, Sheinbaum revealed she had rejected an offer from Trump during a call last week to send US troops into Mexico to help fight drug trafficking.\n\n“I told him, ‘No, President Trump, our territory is inviolable, our sovereignty is inviolable,’” said Sheinbaum, adding that while the two countries can collaborate, “we will never accept the presence of the US army in our territory”.\n\nMexico’s Sheinbaum wins plaudits for cool head in dealings with Trump\nRead more\n\nTrump on Sunday confirmed he had made the offer to Sheinbaum, because the cartels “are horrible people that have been killing people left and right and have been – they’ve made a fortune on selling drugs and destroying our people”.\n\n“The president of Mexico is a lovely woman, but she is so afraid of the cartels that she can’t even think straight,” added Trump.\n\nDespite the exchange over the weekend, the public relationship between Trump and Sheinbaum has been largely cordial, with many comparing Sheinbaum’s performance favourably against other world leaders who have clashed with the US president.\n\nThe US-Mexico relationship is complex and vastly important for both countries, spanning trade, migration and security.\n\nSince returning to power in January, Trump has imposed various tariff schemes that have jeopardised the free trade agreement between the two countries and the near trillion dollars of trade a year that passes between them.\n\nTrump directly linked some of those tariffs to reducing the movement of undocumented migrants and fentanyl across the border into the US, and Sheinbaum’s cabinet has been engaged in intense diplomatic efforts to persuade him to withdraw them.\n\nSheinbaum first sent 10,000 additional troops to the border, then Mexico sent 29 high-level organised crime operatives to face justice in the US, including Rafael Caro Quintero, the drug lord who was convicted of the murder of an undercover US Drug Enforcement Administration agent in 1985.\n\nMeanwhile Sheinbaum has abandoned the hands-off security strategy of her predecessor and ally, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, and ramped up direct confrontation of organised crime groups, with soaring arrests and seizures of drugs and guns.\n\n“Trump has created a real pressure that’s forced Mexico to act,” said Will Freeman from the Council on Foreign Relations, a US-based thinktank. “I think Sheinbaum wants to act anyway, but it’s made her job easier by putting this pressure behind her.\n\n“I think Trump’s vision is that this is almost like an insurgency in Mexico,” added Freeman. “And if the Mexican military is not willing to fight it – and they do often seem to be less than willing to use their full force against the cartels – then the US should do it.”\n\nBut experts say it is unclear that greater military action would fundamentally address the problem of organised crime in Mexico.\n\n“I think to really change the balance of power between organised crime and the state in Mexico, you need intelligence, you need accountability through the justice system, you need political will,” said Freeman.\n\nStill, Trump has said that the US could use unilateral military action if Mexico does not do enough to dismantle the cartels.\n\nSheinbaum has warned that her country would not tolerate an “invasion” of its national sovereignty by US forces.\n\n“But the Mexican government should not just assume that [unilateral military action] couldn’t happen, regardless of how bad an idea it would be on many levels,” said Cecilia Farfán-Méndez, from the Global Initiative against Transnational Organised Crime, an NGO. “All scenarios should be planned for.”\n\nExplore more on these topics\nMexico\nUS foreign policy\nClaudia Sheinbaum\nDonald Trump\nAmericas\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/05/sheinbaum-trump-us-military-mexico","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Thomas Graham","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:47:12.584Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Two arrested over bomb plot targeting Lady Gaga concert in Rio attended by millions","content":"Two people have been arrested in connection with an alleged plot to detonate explosives at a free Lady Gaga concert in Rio de Janeiro, in what authorities believe was an attempt to target Brazil’s LGBTQ community.\n\nThe Rio event on Saturday was the biggest show of the pop star’s career. It attracted an estimated 2.1 million fans to Copacabana beach and had crowds screaming and dancing along.\n\n‘Like a religious thing’: free Lady Gaga concert draws 2.1m to Rio\nRead more\n\n“They were clearly saying that they were planning an attack at Lady Gaga’s concert motivated by sexual orientation,” Felipe Cury, secretary of the Rio police, told a press conference on Sunday.\n\nThe Rio police chief, Luiz Lima, said the group disseminated hate speech and violent content online “aimed at gaining notoriety in order to attract more viewers, more participants – most of them teenagers, many of them children”.\n\nEven as Brazilian authorities said they arrested suspects in the hours before Lady Gaga’s show, the event went ahead without disruption – leading some to question the seriousness of the threat. Serious security concerns typically lead organisers to cancel such massive events – as happened with Taylor Swift’s concerts in Vienna last year.\n\nPolice said nothing about the alleged plot at the time in an effort to “avoid panic” and “the distortion of information”.\n\nA spokesperson for Lady Gaga said the pop star and her team “learned about this alleged threat via media reports this morning. Prior to and during the show, there were no known safety concerns, nor any communication from the police or authorities to Lady Gaga regarding any potential risks.”\n\nThe statement added: “Her team worked closely with law enforcement throughout the planning and execution of the concert and all parties were confident in the safety measures in place.”\n\nSecurity was tight at Saturday’s concert, with 5,200 military and police officers deployed to the beach where fans were revelling in the pop singer’s classic hits including Born This Way, which became an LGBTQ anthem after its 2011 release.\n\nAuthorities arrested two people in connection with the alleged plot – a man described as the group’s leader in the southern state of Rio Grande do Sul on illegal weapons possession charges, and a teenager in Rio on child sexual abuse charges. Police did not elaborate on their exact roles in the plot or on how the group came to target Lady Gaga’s free concert.\n\n“Those involved were recruiting participants, including teenagers, to carry out integrated attacks using improvised explosives and molotov cocktails,” police said.\n\nThe Justice Ministry said it determined the group posed a “risk to public order”. It said the group falsely presented themselves online as Little Monsters – Lady Gaga’s nickname for her fans – in order to lure teeangers into “networks with violent and self-destructive content”.\n\nDuring a series of raids on the homes of 15 suspects across several Brazilian states, authorities confiscated phones and other electronic devices. Although police said they believed homemade bombs were intended for use in the planned attack, there was no mention of the raids turning up any weapons or explosive material.\n\nCury said one of the suspects whose home was raided in the city of Macaé, near Rio, “had a religious motivation” and “claimed [Lady Gaga] was a Satanist”.\n\nIn an Instagram post, Lady Gaga has expressed gratitude for the enormous crowd.\n\n“Nothing could prepare me for the feeling I had during last night’s show – the absolute pride and joy I felt singing for the people of Brazil,” she wrote. “The sight of the crowd during my opening songs took my breath away. Your heart shines so bright, your culture is so vibrant and special, I hope you know how grateful I am to have shared this historical moment with you.”\n\nLady Gaga at Coachella review – a thrilling all-timer of a performance\nRead more\n\nHer free beach concert stood out at a time of surging ticket prices for live music around the world as concertgoers pay budget-busting costs to see their favourite artists.\n\nLast month Lady Gaga performed at Coachella Valley music festival in California, where tickets fetched upwards of $600 for one weekend. The high prices of tickets for her upcoming shows in Australia have also attracted criticism locally.\n\nLast May, superstar Madonna also performed on Copacabana beach, playing the final show of her latest world tower for some 1.6 million fans on the sprawling sands.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nLady Gaga\nRio de Janeiro\nBrazil\nAmericas\nPop and rock\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/music/2025/may/05/lady-gaga-concert-rio-bomb-plast-arrests","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:47:19.694Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Trump says he ‘doesn’t rule out’ using military force to control Greenland","content":"Donald Trump would not rule out using military force to gain control of Greenland, the world’s largest island and an autonomous territory within Denmark, a fellow Nato member with the US.\n\nSince taking office, the US president has repeatedly expressed the idea of US expansion into Greenland, triggering widespread condemnation and unease both on the island itself and in the global diplomatic community. Greenland is seen as strategically important both for defense and as a future source of mineral wealth.\n\nIn an interview on NBC’s Meet The Press on Sunday, Trump was asked whether he would rule out using force against the territory.\n\nDanish PM tells US ‘you cannot annex another country’ on visit to Greenland\nRead more\n\n“I don’t rule it out. I don’t say I’m going to do it, but I don’t rule out anything. No, not there. We need Greenland very badly. Greenland is a very small amount of people, which we’ll take care of, and we’ll cherish them, and all of that. But we need that for international security,” Trump said.\n\nThe exchange came as part of wide-ranging interview following Trump’s first 100-days in office last week and he was also asked about the idea of using military force against Canada – an idea once unthinkable but now a subject of speculation amid Trump’s repeated assertion he would like to make Canada the US’s 51st state.\n\n“It’s highly unlikely. I don’t see it with Canada. I just don’t see it, I have to be honest with you,” Trump said.\n\nTrump said he had spoke with Canada’s new prime minister, Mark Carney, and confirmed that the pair had not spoken about making his country part of the US.\n\nBut he said they could discuss the topic when Carney visits Washington DC “this week or next week”. Carney, along with around 90% of Canadians, oppose the idea of folding Canada into the US. But Trump said he was open to a discussion.\n\n“I’ll always talk about that. You know why? We subsidize Canada to the tune of $200bn a year,” Trump said. “We don’t need their cars. In fact, we don’t want their cars. We don’t need their energy. We don’t even want their energy. We have more than they do. We don’t want their lumber. We have great lumber. All I have to do is free it up from the environmental lunatics.”\n\nskip past newsletter promotion\n\nSign up to This Week in Trumpland\n\nFree newsletter\n\nA deep dive into the policies, controversies and oddities surrounding the Trump administration\n\nEnter your email address\nSign up\nPrivacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.\n\nafter newsletter promotion\n\nTriumph for Carney: what happened in Canada’s election, and what will it mean?\nRead more\n\nTrump said that if “Canada was part of the US it wouldn’t cost us. It would be great … it would be a cherished state. And, if you look at our map, if you look at the geography – I’m a real estate guy at heart. When I look down at that without that artificial line that was drawn with a ruler many years ago – was just an artificial line, goes straight across. You don’t even realize.”\n\n“What a beautiful country it would be,” he added.\n\nA poll published last month found that 68% of Americans believe Trump is serious about the US trying to take over Greenland, and 53% think Trump is serious when he talks about the US trying to take control of Canada.\n\nBut the survey, commissioned by ABC News found that respondents didn’t think either annexation would be a good idea. About 86% said they opposed the US trying to take control of Canada, and 76% opposed trying to take control of Greenland.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nDonald Trump\nTrump administration\nGreenland\nNato\nCanada\nMark Carney\nUS politics\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/04/trump-greenland-denmark-military-force","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Edward Helmore","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:47:23.068Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"India tries to halt auction of Piprahwa gems found with Buddha’s remains","content":"The Indian government has issued a legal notice to halt the “unethical” auction of ancient gem relics, which it said should be treated as the sacred body of the Buddha.\n\nIts ministry of culture said the auction of the Piprahwa gems in Hong Kong this week “violates Indian and international laws, as well as United Nations conventions”, and demanded their repatriation to India “for preservation and religious veneration”.\n\nThe legal notice has been served on Sotheby’s Hong Kong and Chris Peppé, one of three heirs of William Claxton Peppé, a British colonial landowner who in 1898 excavated the gems on his estate in northern India, who are selling the relics.\n\nThe auction, which has prompted an outcry from scholars and monastic leaders, is scheduled for 7 May, and the gems are expected to sell for about HK$100m (£9.7m).\n\nView image in fullscreen\nThe Piprahwa gems. Photograph: Sotheby’s\n\nA letter, posted on the ministry of culture’s Instagram account, said Peppé, a Los Angeles-based TV director and film editor, lacked the authority to sell the relics. Sotheby’s, by holding the auction, was “participating in continued colonial exploitation”, it added.\n\nThe ministry insisted on the immediate cessation of the auction, saying the gem relics “constitute inalienable religious and cultural heritage of India and the global Buddhist community”.\n\nIt also called on Sotheby’s and Chris Peppé to issue a public apology to the Indian government and Buddhists worldwide, and for the full disclosure of all provenance documents and any other relics in the possession of William Peppé’s heirs or transferred by them to any other entity or individual.\n\nFailure to comply would result in legal proceedings in Indian and Hong Kong courts and through international bodies “for violations of cultural heritage laws”, the letter warned.\n\nThe ministry added that it would launch a public campaign highlighting Sotheby’s role “in perpetuating colonial injustice and becoming a party to [the] unethical sale of religious relics”.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nThe Piprahwa gems. Photograph: Sotheby’s\n\nThe gems include amethysts, coral, garnets, pearls, rock crystals, shells and gold, either worked into pendants, beads and other ornaments, or in their natural form.\n\nThey were originally buried in a dome-shaped funerary monument, called a stupa, in Piprahwa, in present-day Uttar Pradesh, India, on about 240-200BC, when they were mixed with some of the cremated remains of the Buddha, who died about 480BC.\n\nThe British crown claimed Peppé’s find under the 1878 Indian Treasure Trove Act, and the bones and ash were given to the Buddhist monarch King Chulalongkorn of Siam.\n\nMost of the 1,800 gems went to what is now the Indian Museum in Kolkata. Peppé was permitted to retain approximately a fifth of them, which were described as “duplicates” of some of the others.\n\nOn the matter of the gems’ provenance and ownership, the ministry’s letter noted that under the Buddhist religion, materials in sacred funerary mounds are “sacred grave goods … inseparable from the sacred relics and cannot be commodified.\n\n“We beg to note that the relics of the Buddha cannot be treated as ‘specimens’ but as the sacred body and originally interred offerings to the sacred body of the Buddha.”\n\nThe ministry added that the sellers, who describe themselves as custodians of the gems “had no right to alienate or misappropriate the asset … an extraordinary heritage of humanity where custodianship would include not just safe upkeep but also an unflinching sentiment of veneration towards these relics”.\n\nIts letter said the proposed auction “offends the sentiments of over 500 million Buddhists worldwide”, violated ethics and disrupted sacred tradition.\n\nPeppé, who wrote a piece for Sotheby’s about his family’s custodianship of the gems, has been contacted for comment.\n\nHe previously told the Guardian that the “Piprahwa gems were relic offerings made at the time of the reinterment of the Buddha’s ashes over 200 years after his passing. I have not found any Buddhists who claim the gems are corporeal remains.”\n\nWith regards to his and his two relatives’ right to sell the gems, he added: “Legally, the ownership is unchallenged.”\n\nSotheby’s has been contacted for comment. It previously told the Guardian that it has conducted “requisite due diligence”, including in relation to provenance and legality.\n\nThe Indian ministry of culture’s Instagram post stated that “Sotheby’s has responded to the legal notice with the assurance that full attention is being given to this matter.”\n\nExplore more on these topics\nBuddhism\nIndia\nHong Kong\nSouth and central Asia\nColonialism\nReligion\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/05/india-tries-to-halt-auction-of-piprahwa-gems-found-with-buddhas-remains","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"David Batty","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:47:47.612Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Rights groups condemn arrest of Hong Kong activist Anna Kwok’s father and brother","content":"Human rights groups have condemned the arrest of relatives of Anna Kwok, an exiled pro-democracy activist who is wanted by the Hong Kong police, in the first example of the city’s national security law being used to target the family members of an activist living overseas.\n\nKwok, 28, is the executive director of the Washington-based Hong Kong Democracy Council, and is one of 19 overseas activists wanted by the national security police, who are offering bounties of HK$1m (£97,000) for information leading to arrest.\n\nKwok’s father, 68, and her brother, 35, were arrested on 30 April on suspicion of “attempting to deal with directly or indirectly, any funds or other financial assets or economic resources belonging to, or owned or controlled by, a relevant absconder”. The police said the men were suspected of helping Kwok to change the details of a life insurance policy and withdraw its remaining value. Kwok’s father was charged and detained while her brother was released on bail pending further investigations.\n\nYalkun Uluyol, China researcher at Human Rights Watch, said: “The Chinese government has increased its appalling use of collective punishment against family members of peaceful activists from Hong Kong. The Hong Kong authorities should immediately and unconditionally release Anna Kwok’s father and cease harassing families of Hong Kong activists.”\n\nChinaAid, a US-based human rights group, said: “This represents a deeply unsettling and significant escalation of the ongoing retaliatory actions against the families of exiled activists … this is a blatant attempt to silence overseas dissidents by targeting their family members at home, a tactic that brazenly disregards fundamental human rights and the rule of law.”\n\nPolice in Hong Kong have repeatedly questioned the relatives of exiled activists. In recent months relatives of Tony Chung, Frances Hui and Carmen Lau, overseas pro-democracy activists who are also wanted by the Hong Kong police, have been questioned. Chung and Lau, who are in the UK, have both had threatening letters sent to their neighbours offering rewards for information leading to their capture.\n\nThe arrests in Kwok’s case mark the first time that relatives have been criminally charged. Kwok’s father faces a sentence of up to seven years in prison if convicted. He has been denied bail with the case adjourned to 13 June, according to Reuters.\n\nThe Hong Kong police and the Hong Kong Democracy Council did not immediately respond to requests for comment. Kwok could not be reached for comment.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nHong Kong\nAsia Pacific\nChina\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/05/anna-kwok-father-brother-arrested-hong-kong","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Amy Hawkins","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:47:49.313Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Singapore ruling party wins election in landslide","content":"Singapore’s ruling party has notched a resounding win in general elections, official results have shown, giving the prime minister, Lawrence Wong, the clear mandate he sought from voters.\n\nWong’s long-ruling People’s Action party crossed the threshold of 49 seats early on Sunday to form a majority government in the wealthy city-state’s 97-seat unicameral legislature, with sample counts earlier showing the PAP winning all but 10 seats.\n\n“We are grateful once again for your strong mandate, and we will honour it,” a broadly smiling Wong said shortly after winning his ward, thanking supporters gathered at Yio Chu Kang stadium.\n\nWong was facing his first major test against a rejuvenated opposition and had urged voters to offer him a strong show of support as he navigates the trade-oriented nation through global economic uncertainties brought by US tariffs.\n\nThe PAP, which has steered the south-east Asian country to prosperity while being criticised for suppressing dissent, was always expected to easily retain a clear majority in the legislature.\n\nHowever, its dominance has been increasingly challenged by a more vocal electorate over the years.\n\nPopular after leading Singapore’s Covid task force, Wong took over last year from his predecessor Lee Hsien Loong, the son of founding premier Lee Kuan Yew who ruled the island state after its bitter breakup with Malaysia in 1965.\n\nWong had warned Singapore would be hit hard if the US president, Donald Trump, went ahead with the tariffs he announced and then paused for most countries, and that it needed to stay open and competitive to counter their effects.\n\nHe has also said the ructions caused could require a major restructuring of Singapore’s economy.\n\n“The intense campaigning by PM Lawrence Wong and former PM Lee Hsien Loong in the hot seats must have helped a lot and the fear of Trump’s tariffs must have worried voters as well,” political observer and veteran former editor PN Balji told AFP.\n\nThe overwhelming PAP majority has become a norm in Singapore’s political landscape.\n\nBut in the runup to the latest polls, the PAP had faced a series of controversies.\n\nLee Hsien Loong is locked in a bitter feud with his brother Lee Hsien Yang, who vehemently supports the opposition and who has sought political asylum in Britain.\n\nThe long-running family row centres on allegations made by Lee Hsien Yang that his brother is seeking to block the demolition of a family bungalow to capitalise on Lee Kuan Yew’s legacy – something he has denied.\n\nLast year, former transport minister S Iswaran was thrown in jail for graft, and in 2023 the parliament speaker and a lawmaker resigned over an “inappropriate” affair.\n\nAt the same time, younger voters showed themselves to be increasingly receptive to alternative political voices.\n\nOne voter told AFP she had been impressed by “refreshing and exciting” new candidates from across the political spectrum.\n\n“Whether or not they get elected, I hope we see and hear more of them, and get to know them better,” said 40-year-old Shi’ai Liang.\n\nIn 2020, the country’s largest opposition group, the Workers’ party (WP), made historic gains, winning 10 of the 93 seats at stake – a significant jump from its previously held four seats.\n\nThe WP – which has become politically slicker – had been hoping to build on that momentum with a slate of charismatic candidates, including a top lawyer.\n\nThe party pulled in massive crowds at its rallies during the campaign, just like in previous elections, but those big numbers have seldom translated into electoral wins in the past.\n\nCampaigning on cost of living issues, WP candidates said more opposition MPs were needed to deprive the PAP of a political “blank cheque” to do whatever it wants.\n\nThe PAP, however, pointed to the billions of Singapore dollars it has spent in helping citizens cope with rising costs, including via cash handouts and grocery vouchers.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nSingapore\nAsia Pacific\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/03/singapore-ruling-party-wins-election-in-landslide","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"unknown","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:48:02.190Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"New York official charged in shooting of DoorDash delivery driver who was lost","content":"Authorities have arrested a New York official for shooting a lost DoorDash delivery driver over the weekend.\n\nOn Sunday, New York state police announced the arrest of 48-year old John J Reilly of Chester, New York, after he allegedly shot a driver who got lost while attempting to deliver food to a residence in the Valerie Drive neighborhood on Friday evening.\n\nAuthorities said the driver approached several homes asking for directions before arriving at Reilly’s residence. Reilly, who is currently Chester’s highway superintendent and a federally licensed firearms dealer, then told the driver to get off his property. As the driver attempted to leave in his vehicle, Reilly fired multiple shots at the driver, striking him once in the back and causing serious injuries, police said.\n\nReilly has since been charged with assault in the first degree, criminal possession of a weapon in the second degree, as well as a criminal possession of a firearm.\n\nThe driver required emergency surgery, per a New York Times report. An Orange county district attorney’s office spokesperson told the paper that the driver’s injuries are “serious but not at this time expected to be fatal”.\n\nThe driver has not been publicly identified by authorities, but family members told ABC7NY that the driver is 24-years old and from west Africa. He moved to the nearby town of Middletown last month and does not speak English. They added that he was unfamiliar with the area and that his phone had died.\n\nFollowing the incident, the driver drove home “because he thought he did something wrong”, the outlet added.\n\n“There’s nothing to indicate the victim had any nefarious intentions, he’s just out there doing his job, trying to make a food delivery,” New York state police captain Joseph Kolek told reporters.\n\nIn a statement to the Guardian, DoorDash said: “No one should ever fear for their safety just for trying to make deliveries in their neighborhood. We’re devastated by this senseless act of violence, and we’re wishing the Dasher a full and speedy recovery. We’ll continue to work closely with law enforcement as they investigate this tragic incident.”\n\nIn 2023, a 20-year old woman, Kaylin Gillis, was shot dead in upstate New York after the car she was riding in mistakenly went to the wrong property. A jury found 66-year old Kevin Monahan, the property’s owner, guilty of second-degree murder last year.\n\nGillis’s death occurred just days after a white homeowner in Kansas City, Missouri shot 16-year old Ralph Yarl, a Black honor student who rang 84-year old Andrew Lester’s doorbell by mistake. Yarl survived the shooting and Lester was charged with first-degree assault and armed criminal action.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nNew York\nUS crime\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/06/john-j-reilly-charged-doordash-shooting","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Maya Yang","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T16:50:47.539Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Woman says Boston hotel guard told her to leave bathroom because she ‘was a man’","content":"A couple visiting Boston says they were left confused and appalled after being forced out of the Liberty Hotel during a Kentucky Derby party on Saturday, following what they describe as being confronted and wrongfully accused in the women’s restroom.\n\nAnsley Baker and her girlfriend, Liz Victor, both cisgender women, said a hotel security guard entered the women’s bathroom and demanded Baker leave the stall she was using, claiming she didn’t belong there.\n\n“All of a sudden there was banging on the door,” Baker recalled to CBS News.\n\n“I pulled my shorts up. I hadn’t even tied them. One of the security guards was there telling me to get out of the bathroom, that I was a man in the women’s bathroom. I said, ‘I’m a woman.”\n\nVictor, waiting by the sinks, heard the commotion and saw the security guard confronting Baker.\n\n“I looked down and I saw her shoes and that’s when I was like, ‘What is going on?” she told the network.\n\nThe couple said that once Baker was escorted out, other women in line hurled insults, calling her “a creep” and demanding she be removed. Security staff then allegedly asked both women to show their IDs to confirm their gender. After a heated exchange, they were told to leave the hotel.\n\nIn a statement shared with CBS, the Liberty Hotel accuse the two women of sharing one stall: “An incident occurred at the Liberty Hotel on Saturday, May 3 where several women alerted security of two adults sharing a bathroom stall. The bathroom was cleared out as two adults in one stall are not permitted. After leaving the bathroom, a member of the couple from the stall put their hands on our security team and it was then that they were removed from the premises.\n\n“The Liberty Hotel has a zero-tolerance policy for any physical altercations on our property. The safety of our guests and staff is our priority, and this event is under investigation. The Liberty Hotel is and always will be an ally of the LGBTQ+ community and a place where everyone is welcome and celebrated.”\n\nBaker and Victor insist they were never in the same stall and dispute the hotel’s account of events.\n\n“Once the stall door opened, and I’m the only one in there, it escalated further,” Baker told Boston News 25. “I don’t think that aligns with what they’re saying.”\n\nThe couple said they have made sure that Boston mayor Michelle Wu’s office was aware of their experience in hopes that they can stop a similar situation from happening to anyone else.\n\nThey also hope their experience can spark awareness and change.\n\n“We know we’re not the only ones that face this kind of thing,” Baker said to CBS. Victor added: “It was a very scary situation, but trans women experience this every single day in the US and across the world.”\n\nThe incident comes at a time of heightened tension between the administration and the LGBTQ+ community. Some of Donald Trump’s earliest moves in office were to sign executive orders directing the prohibition of gender transitions for people under the age of 19 and banning trans athletes from competing in women’s sports.\n\nOn his first day in office, Trump signed an executive order called “Defending Women from Gender Ideology Extremism and Restoring Biological Truth to the Federal Government”, instructing the federal government to remove “all radical gender ideology guidance, communication, policies, and forms”.\n\nTrump has also limited access and funding for LGBTQ+ arts, with orders that instruct arts organizations not to fund projects that promote “gender ideology” as well as appointing himself chair of the iconic John F Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.\n\nThe incident also echoed an ongoing Republican talking point centered on bathrooms and gender identity. In November 2024, the South Carolina Republican Nancy Mace introduced a bill to ban Representative Sarah McBride from using the bathroom that corresponds with her gender identity. Speaker Mike Johnson has supported and subsequently enforced that ban.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nBoston\nLGBTQ+ rights\nUS politics\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/06/boston-hotel-bathroom-same-sex-couple","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Marina Dunbar","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T17:36:36.139Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"‘Hi mum!’ The simple WhatsApp text scam costing parents and friends dear","content":"“Hi mum,” the first message starts, “I’ve lost my phone.” It carries on with a tale of woe: for some reason the sender has also been locked out of his or her bank account.\n\nLuckily a friend is often on hand to help – it’s their phone that the message comes from, apparently – and if you could just transfer some money to their account that would be great. Alternatively, you might be asked to pay the rent, direct to a landlord, or foot some other urgent bill that has arrived at this time of crisis.\n\nThe messages arrive on WhatsApp, or by text. And the fraudsters are not always posing as children – sometimes they pretend to be friends, and sometimes they claim to be parents.\n\nData from Santander show that among customers of the bank, fraudsters pretending to be someone’s son were the most successful, followed by daughters, then mothers.\n\nChris Ainsley, the bank’s head of fraud risk management, says the scams are evolving at “breakneck speed”. He says: “We’re hearing of instances where AI voice impersonation technology is being used to create WhatsApp and SMS voice notes, making the scam seem ever more realistic.”\n\nWhat the scam looks like\nView image in fullscreen\nA screengrab excerpt of the WhatsApp ‘Hi mum’ text scam. Photograph: Santander\n\nA friendly message from someone claiming to be close to you but, crucially, from an unknown number. If you do not respond, there may be several before they give up. If you do respond, the fraudsters are often willing to enter into a conversation, but the details are generic.\n\nFairly quickly into the exchange they will say that there’s an urgent need for money for something, putting pressure on you to act quickly to help.\n\nThe “sender’s” usual bank account will be out of the question for the transfer for some reason, and they will ask that you send it to an account you do not know.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nA screengrab excerpt of the WhatsApp ‘Hi mum’ text scam. Photograph: Santander\nWhat the messages ask for\n\nMoney. They will say that cash is needed, maybe to get a new phone, or for living expenses and ask you to transfer it.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nA screengrab excerpt of the WhatsApp ‘Hi mum’ text scam Photograph: Santander\n\nThe bank details will be in someone else’s name – they’ll say it belongs to the “friend” or whoever they owe – and the sum of money is typically not a round number. The account is either one belonging to the fraudsters or a third party, who is being used as a money mule.\n\nWhat to do\n\nIf you are worried your loved one is really in trouble, check. Try them on their usual number – and do not panic if they don’t answer straight away.\n\nYou could ask a question that you know the other person will know the answer to.\n\nWhich? suggests that you protect yourself against future scams of this kind by setting up a family password which you can ask for to check a sender’s credentials.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nA screengrab excerpt of the WhatsApp ‘Hi mum’ text scam Photograph: Santander\n\nIf you have transferred the cash, call your bank straight away in case it can stop the payment.\n\nWhatsApp messages can be reported via the app – you click on the message and are given the option to report it.\n\nScam texts can be forwarded to 7726, which goes to the telephone network providers.\n\nYou can also report scams to Action Fraud.\n\nWhenever you attempt to transfer the money from your bank it will ask you questions about what is happening. Always answer them honestly, even if the message sender suggests you do otherwise.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nScams\nScam watch\nWhatsApp\nMobile phones\nConsumer affairs\nCrime\nfeatures\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/money/2025/may/04/hi-mum-whatsapp-text-scam-parents-friends-bank","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Hilary Osborne","publishedAt":"2025-05-06T18:05:12.515Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"‘The crux of all evil’: what happened to the first city that tried to ban smartphones for under-14s?","content":"A\nt 3.12pm on a sunny spring afternoon in St Albans, Yasser Afghen reaches for the iPhone in his jeans pocket, hoping to use the three minutes before his son emerges from his year 1 primary class to scroll through his emails. As he lifts the phone to his face, Matthew Tavender, the head teacher of Cunningham Hill school, strides across the playground towards him. Afghen smiles apologetically, puts his phone away, and spends the remaining waiting time listening to the birdsong in the trees behind the school yard.\n\nA one-storey 1960s block with 14 classrooms backing on to a playing field, Cunningham Hill primary feels like an unlikely hub for a revolution. But a year ago, Tavender and the school’s executive head, Justine Elbourne-Cload, began coordinating with the heads at other primary schools across the city, then sent a joint letter to parents and carers across St Albans: the highly addictive nature of smartphones was having a lasting effect on children’s brains. The devices were robbing children of their childhood. Could parents, the letter asked, please avoid giving them smartphones until they turned 14?\n\nOne of the fathers who received the letter was Matt Adams, the founder and editor of the St Albans Times, who wrote an article highlighting the initiative. The story was picked up nationally (“St Albans wants to be the first smartphone-free city for under-14s,” said the Times), and then internationally. People in Singapore, Australia and South Africa all heard about an ambitious attempt by parents and teachers in a small suburban city, 23 miles from central London, to fight off the reach of global tech companies.\n\nA year later, it’s clear that St Albans is still far from a smartphone-free city for under-14s. And yet, something small and potentially significant has shifted.\n\nIn December 2023, when Tavender did a survey of his year 6 pupils (aged 10-11), 45 of 60 pupils already had smartphones – 75%. A year later, this has dropped to just seven – 12%. A similarly stark drop has been noted by heads at other schools in the city. His aim is for this trend to continue. In fact, he hopes that the smartphone resistance movement accompanies his primary schoolchildren into secondary school, so that in time the sight of a child carrying a smartphone in St Albans will trigger a frisson of shock, akin to the vision of a child with a cigarette.\n\nW\nhen Jonathan Haidt’s The Anxious Generation: How the Great Rewiring of Childhood is Causing an Epidemic of Mental Illness was published last year, Tavender was immediately receptive. Haidt, an American social psychologist, notes that depression and anxiety for adolescents in the US rose by more than 50% between 2010 and 2019, with a 131% increase in the suicide rate for girls aged 10-14; he argues that the “new phone-based childhood that took shape roughly 12 years ago is making young people sick and blocking their progress to flourishing in adulthood”.\n\nTavender was already worried by the rapidly changing nature of the problems he and his colleagues were facing. Most dispiriting, he says, was having to deal with law enforcement. Fifteen years ago, when he started teaching at the school, it would have been unthinkable for a teacher to have to talk to the police and families about the sharing of a nude image.\n\nView image in fullscreen\n‘It’s the girls who are struggling more.’ Photograph: Halfpoint Images/Getty Images\n\nOut of sensitivity to the children involved, he is vague about the incident that caused the school the biggest headache, but explains that a photo had been taken as a joke, and was quickly shared with a large number of people. The school spent hours ringing up dozens of parents. “It wasn’t done in a sexual way … it was just boys mucking about. There was no malice in it. But it was sent very widely around St Albans. Once it’s sent, it’s sent everywhere. We had to say: ‘Please check your child’s phone – you need to delete that image,’” he says. “It was awful for the families.”\n\nDuring informal conversations with primary school heads across the city, he was learning that his colleagues were confronting similar problems. “Everyone has experienced something, either with police involvement, or other agencies. Teachers at infant schools are dealing with children watching inappropriate content as young as five and six,” he says.\n\nHe also had a more general sense that behaviours were changing, even among the school’s younger pupils. He has noticed more body image concerns, more pupils worrying about monitoring their steps and talking about calorie-counting apps. Teachers have recorded greater levels of school avoidance. “A few years ago we didn’t see this at all; now, it’s not huge numbers but we have seven or eight children who really struggle to be in school.” He sees this as the combined result of Covid and children’s increasingly screen-based childhood.\n\nHe was concerned, too, about declining concentration. “It’s the TikTok brain.” Sats preparation study sessions have had to be broken up into shorter chunks to allow children to cope, he says. Haidt also writes of fragmented attention spans, warning of the opportunity cost of time wasted responding to streams of content from friends and unknown people online, posting material in a never-ending quest for likes; children, he argues, become less adept at reading facial cues, and more reliant on the simplicity of emotions expressed through emojis. The outrage cycles of social media push children quickly into a defensive mode, he writes, while online lives make them more vulnerable to public shaming.\n\nIn the classroom, teachers are also finding that “We get a lot more ‘nos’. If a child is playing [an online] game, they can turn it off and start again if they don’t win. If they’re watching something on YouTube and they don’t like it, they move on to something else. They’re used to getting immediate feedback, generally positive, and if they don’t get it they can just swipe and move on. We’re seeing children with less resilience to things they don’t want to do,” he says. At one meeting I attended, he told the parents that executives in Silicon Valley don’t let their children access social media. “They know something we don’t know,” he says.\n\nLast February, he heard a radio interview with a primary head teacher in Dorset talking about a campaign to encourage parents to give their children “brick” phones; he called him to ask for advice and was put in touch with the newly launched Smartphone Free Childhood movement, an initiative set up by parents in Suffolk, which campaigns for a ban on social media for children under 16 and a ban on smartphones for children under 14.\n\nView image in fullscreen\n‘We’re seeing children with less resilience to things they don’t want to do’ … Matthew Tavender. Photograph: Anselm Ebulue/The Guardian\n\nThen, in May, at the start of the summer term, Tavender and his colleague Elbourne-Cload convened a parents’ meeting. “It was the most well-attended meeting we’ve ever had,” he says. “About 80 people turned up; normally we get about 40 to 50. We tagged it on to the end of a meeting about reading – which is the most critical thing in primary education – and just eight people turned up to that one.” The teacher who was leading the reading session was disconcerted to see crowds of parents outside the door, all staring at their phones, waiting for the meeting about phone use.\n\nOne father interrupted the presentation to accuse the teachers of being anti-tech, Tavender tells me, but mostly there was a sense of optimism that the parents could do something to translate their sense of latent worry into positive action. In the absence of help from the government or action by tech firms, they felt suddenly empowered. A few days after the meeting, the St Albans primary schools consortium sent out their letter.\n\nThe schools were already smartphone-free areas, the letter explained, but the idea was to “change the ‘normal’ age that children are given smartphones”. “By ‘smartphones’, we refer to phones that are able to access the internet, as opposed to mobile phones that can only text and make phone calls.” Parents should “resist pressure” from their children, and work together to “reset the expectation and remove social peer pressure”.\n\nThe letter ended with an emotive plea: “Our children’s futures are so important, to you and to us. In a world where fast-changing technology is actually impacting the development of our children’s brains, it is up to us to stand up for them, and their futures. If not us, then who? Yours faithfully, St Albans Primary Headteachers.”\n\nA\nmonth later, last June, I went to a second after-school meeting, for parents who had been unable to make the first one. Tavender, with his grey V-neck jumper (an adult version of school uniform), grey trousers and greying beard, is not an obviously revolutionary figure. He talks about his fondness for watching golf. His delivery style is a bit wearily monotone, as if he’s reminding the room for the 15th time of what he considers to be acceptable behaviour in the lunch queue. So his presentation is not in the least rabble-rousing, but somehow the parents are totally gripped.\n\n“When you’re ready for your child to stop being a child, give them a smartphone,” he tells them, running them through a series of slides provided by Smartphone Free Childhood. “WhatsApp is the crux of all evil, in my mind.” Particularly worrying were the recent changes to the app’s settings, allowing users to create bigger groups. He had noticed children taking part in a “first to 1,000 challenge”, which involves trying to create huge group chats. Photographs get shared with ever-widening circles of people; no one really knows who else is in the group.\n\n“We’ve had issues with children being asked for indecent photos at 10 years old. We’ve had instances where someone adds an older cousin, who then adds another friend who then starts posting pornography, violent crimes,” he says. “We cannot manage that as parents. But we also can’t say we can’t do anything about it, because we can.”\n\nView image in fullscreen\n‘Some parents have refused to send their kids to school for a week when a phone was confiscated.’ Photograph: Maskot/Getty Images\n\nOutside the windows of the big assembly hall, the low sound of cooing wood pigeons is audible. The deserted residential streets smell of lavender and roses, with a faint undertone of wood smoke; ivy is growing up the telephone pylons. But for all the semi-rural calm, there is no escape here from the headaches of modern parenting.\n\n“When we were at school, at least when we went home the bullies couldn’t get us there; now you can’t get away from it,” Tavender says. “I’m not trying to go back to the halcyon days of proper bullying where we got beaten up and got given wedgies,” he adds, prompting a few snorts of laughter. “It’s the girls who are struggling more. Phones seem massively more negative for girls.”\n\nMost powerful is his readiness to talk about his own struggles. “I’m addicted to my phone. I absolutely am.” He admits that he and his wife, also a teacher, now regret giving their daughter a phone when she moved to secondary school. He describes an evening a few months earlier when he was watching golf on television, while also playing with his phone; his wife was next to him watching a film on her iPad, and also texting friends; his daughter was drawing on a Chromebook, while messaging on her phone. He tells them this to reassure parents that he isn’t judging them. “There were three of us on six devices. We didn’t talk for two hours. We’ve got to model better behaviour to our children.”\n\nBy the end of the meeting, many parents have agreed to become ambassadors and work to persuade fellow parents to sign the Smartphone Free Childhood pact, in which they promise to delay purchasing their child a smartphone until they turn 14. Campaigners would like to see access to social media sites – Snapchat, Instagram, TikTok – restricted until 16. There are already age verification processes, but the rules are poorly enforced: most platforms have a minimum age of 13, but six in 10 children aged eight to 12 who use them are signed up with their own profile. A recent Children’s Commissioner report found that the 69% of children aged eight to 15 spend up to three hours a day using an internet-enabled device, while 23% spend more than four hours on them.\n\nWill Ashton, who runs a digital marketing agency in London, and who also has a son in year 4 and another in year 2, has taken on responsibility for a lot of the campaigning. He is well aware that the success of the movement depends on the rapid reach made possible by Instagram and WhatsApp, the apps the parents most mistrust. “One of the ironies of this is that I’ve never spent more time on my phone,” he says. He would like parents to hold off on getting their children smartphones until 16, arguing that smartphone use should be seen as an adult pursuit, like drinking, smoking or driving.\n\nHis children are allowed time on iPads, with carefully curated parental controls. “I haven’t heard a counterargument yet that feels compelling. This isn’t anti-technology. It’s about allowing children to have access to material that is appropriate for their age.”\n\nA\ndams, the local newspaper editor who turned the original letter into a global story, was also already uneasy about smartphone use among children. He had noticed how footage of a recent machete stabbing outside a local college, featuring crowds of identifiable teenagers, had gone viral. A few weeks later, at his daughter’s school, there had been a suicide attempt; teachers tried to handle the issue with discretion, but by the end of the school day, pupils had shared the details with each other over WhatsApp. “I didn’t want to be having conversations about these things with a 12-year-old,” he says.\n\nHe feels proud of the enormous attention his original article has drawn to the campaign (and mildly irritated that his publication was never credited). And he understands why an affluent city such as St Albans is leading on the issue. “It’s a bubble: it voted overwhelmingly against Brexit. It has a very educated, erudite, informed population.”\n\nIn 2024, St Albans was voted the second-best place to live in England. A separate poll last year named the Suffolk town of Woodbridge as the happiest place to live in Britain. The two towns are current hubs for the Smartphone Free Childhood movement. Woodbridge residents Daisy Greenwell and her husband, Joe Ryrie, launched their campaign in February 2024, after Greenwell wrote an emotional Instagram post urging fellow parents to delay giving phones to their children.\n\nThe movement publishes a leader board showing which counties and which schools are doing best at collecting parental pledges. So far the highest take-up has been in London and the home counties; Cunningham Hill school, where more than 50% of parents have signed the pledge, is one of the most engaged schools in the country. (Although Tavender says that his school is not hugely affluent, its targeted funding for disadvantaged students, the so-called pupil premium, is allocated to only 20% of the roll.)\n\nView image in fullscreen\n‘St Albans has a very informed population’ … editor of the St Albans Times, Matt Adams. Photograph: Anselm Ebulue/The Guardian\n\n“It’s not surprising that middle-class parents are the ones who’ve got more time to think deeply about this stuff; it’s probably nearer the top of their worries list than it might be for a lot of parents,” Ryrie says. Campaigners recognise that for families who don’t have money for separate wifi access, or to buy laptops or other alternative screens for children’s homework, a smartphone ban can seem a peculiar luxury. But Ryrie argues that research suggests disadvantaged children suffer more from uncontrolled access to the internet; Haidt writes that a child’s average screen time and social media use rises in single-parent and low-income families. Without further regulation, there could be a risk of a “digital divide between kids who are exposed to the online world without guardrails and parents who have more time to monitor their children’s use,” Ryrie says.\n\nWhen Jamie Oliver campaigned for healthier school dinners a decade ago, some parents passed their children burgers and chips through the school railings, but this campaign hasn’t triggered much opposition. No parent is that sad to be told they shouldn’t rush to spend hundreds of pounds on an item that may introduce years of rows over screen time; even among parents who haven’t read or heard of Haidt, there’s a growing understanding of the risks of smartphones. “I don’t think there are many less controversial topics in Britain today,” Ryrie says.\n\nA\nfew weeks after the primary school heads in St Albans announced their smartphone-free goal, headteachers from 18 out of the 20 secondary schools in Southwark, south London, said they were collaborating to dissuade parents from buying children smartphones before year 10 (aged 14 or 15) at the earliest. Jessica West, headteacher of Ark Walworth academy, said teachers were being forced to take action, in the absence of effective legislation. “Many requests for stronger measures have been made to big tech companies but action is woefully slow and that leaves our children at risk,” she said.\n\nIn July 2024, Eton said it would be giving its first-year boarders (aged 13) basic brick phones that could only send and receive texts. In February 2025, 103 primary schools in Barnet, north London, announced that smartphones would no longer be allowed on the premises and 23 secondary schools in the borough said they were committed to removing smartphones entirely from the school day. Smartphone Free Childhood’s message had spread quickly beyond St Albans and Woodbridge.\n\nSix months after the Southwark initiative was announced, Mike Baxter, head at City of London academy, said pupils had been issued with mandatory phone pouches. Any pupil found with a smartphone out of its pouch and switched on would have it confiscated for a week. “We’re confiscating about 15 a week,” he says. The school is doing random bag searches. “You have to rigorously implement it.” Next year, the school will prohibit ownership of smartphones for all children in year 7; any child who comes to school with one will have it removed for a month. Year by year this policy will continue rolling upwards, to years 8 and then 9.\n\nSome of the students have protested, but the sanctions are severe. “If a child refuses to hand their phone in, they go to our reintegration room. If they come in the next day with a different phone, then we say: you’re back in the reintegration room.”\n\nThere has been anger from a few parents, who have refused to send their children into school for the entire week when the phone was confiscated; on a couple of occasions, parents have come into the school and taken school property – a school iPad, a radio – which they’ve held as ransom, asking the school to return their child’s phone. “In both situations, we’ve just called the police,” he says. “You have to relentlessly follow it through.”\n\nVery few teachers argue in favour of phones. In a letter to the Guardian last month, one teacher described the movement to ban phones in schools as “disappointing”, arguing that staff should help students learn how to use digital devices to learn to “think critically and navigate online spaces filled with disinformation supercharged by artificial intelligence”. But his is a minority voice. “Everyone accepts there’s a major problem,” Baxter says.\n\nA\nmong some of Tavender’s older pupils there is a wistful regret that the school’s campaigning zeal has meant that they will not be getting a smartphone any time soon. Julia Laurence, who sells advertising space for publishing, has told her 10-year-old daughter that she won’t be getting a phone before she’s 14. “She’s got this idea that once you start walking home from school alone, you get a phone. But all the parents in her class have agreed, none of them will get a phone. It’s made it so much easier for us,” she says. Her daughter told anyone who would listen that it was an extremely unfair development. Her mother shrugs. “It’s something I’ve been worried about probably since she was born. I feel like we’re the ones making the change.”\n\nView image in fullscreen\n‘I’ve worried about it since my daughter was born’ ... Julia Laurence. Photograph: Anselm Ebulue/The Guardian\n\nGeorge Dill, 10, and his brother Thomas, eight, have also been told by their parents, Graham and Rachel, both school teachers, that they won’t be getting smartphones until they are at least 14 and ideally not until they are 16. When I meet them in their home, they are standing on the sofa in the sitting room waving golf clubs around, playing a hazardous indoor putting game with their father. When I ask them if they’d like to have a smartphone, their eyes flick instantly towards their parents. “Sort of,” George says.\n\n“What would you say, if I said I was going to buy you one tomorrow?” his father asks.\n\n“I would think you might actually be lying,” George replies.\n\nThomas says his father spends too long on his phone, when he should be doing things like playing football with them. He screws up his eyes, lifting his hands to his face, and mimicks a man manically twiddling his thumbs on an imaginary phone.\n\n“I’m not too overly impressed by my own phone use,” Graham agrees; he resents the frequency with which he is messaged by his employers, often late at night or around 6am.\n\nHe has resisted letting his sons have screens even during long car journeys; during a recent seven-hour drive to Cornwall, they played a protracted game where they scored points for shooting white Teslas with guns made from their fingers. “The most amazing ideas in history come from boredom. Every time your phone goes ping it takes maybe two minutes to recover full concentration.”\n\n“There should be a time limit for different ages,” Thomas says. “The point is that if you don’t have a phone, you don’t have square eyes.”\n\nA\nyear after St Albans primary heads launched their campaign, plenty has happened to shift their movement to something more mainstream. The television series Adolescence attracted renewed political attention to the dangers of hidden online bullying. About 99.8% of primary schools and 90% of secondary schools have now instituted a ban on smartphone use in school hours. The government is in the process of implementing the 2023 Online Safety Act: a series of rules around social media, search and gaming apps and websites will come into force on 25 July. Ofcom says this should prevent young people from encountering the most harmful content relating to suicide, self-harm, eating disorders and pornography (although campaign groups believe the regulations do not go far enough). The parent-power model of the Smartphone Free Childhood movement has sparked 32 offshoots globally – from Kazakhstan and Nigeria to Costa Rica.\n\nBut a quick walk around St Albans suggests that there may not yet have been a fundamental shift. Teenagers in school uniform queueing up for hot drinks in the city centre after school awkwardly balance iPhones, school bags and coffee cups. Nationally, Virgin Media O2 reported a doubling in sales of brick phones last October, which they attributed to parental concerns over online safety. But in the St Albans Three mobile store, the three courteous shop assistants know nothing about the campaign to free St Albans’ under-14s from smartphones. “It tends to be mostly elderly people that ask about brick phones,” one salesperson says. They estimate that the average age of a child getting a phone from their parents is still about 11, when they switch to secondary school.\n\nView image in fullscreen\nLeading on the issue ... St Albans. Photograph: eye35/Alamy\n\nIn a Hollywood version of the St Albans story, there would be a triumphant ending, perhaps with parents hiring a steamroller to crunch their children’s tech, or with teachers facilitating a penitent visit from the founders of WhatsApp, who fly over from California to visit pupils and parents at Cunningham Hill, offering their apologies in a drizzly playground. Tavender, played by Martin Freeman, would be feted for his David and Goliath-style success, just as Alan Bates was when the Post Office scandal was televised. I’m not sure that production companies will be in a bidding race for the rights to this story quite yet.\n\nBut as well as celebrating the fall in smartphone ownership in year 6 from 75% to 12%, Tavender is delighted that the number of parents buying children smartphones has also dropped in lower years. In December 2023, 30% of year 5 students had smartphones; a year later this had dropped to 4.8% – just three children. He thinks the movement will expand organically. “It will take a few years to really show the impact.” He has also noticed fewer parents ignoring their children at pickup time in favour of their mobiles.\n\nBut he is disappointed that secondary schools in the city have not signed up to take a similarly coordinated approach, although most of them do now have clear restrictions on smartphone use. He’s aware that this is a movement that has taken off in the south-east mostly; he says colleagues in York and Middlesbrough have barely heard of the Smartphone Free Childhood movement. He regrets the failure of tech companies to do more to protect children and is mournful that government smartphone initiatives have been watered down.\n\nBut mostly he feels happy to have played a small part in beginning to shift mindsets. “Overall it’s been a success, but it’s a long journey,” he says.\n\nOutside in the playground the father of a nine-year-old girl quietly admits he has only this week bought her a sim card to use in a secondhand smartphone. He works in a restaurant and he and his wife both work shifts; sometimes their daughter has to wait by herself for them to get home. He has rows with his teenage son about screen time, but he feels it’s a necessity for his daughter. “I hate the ding, ding noise of alerts from his friends. His TikTok use is killing me,” he says. “But there are reasons why she needs one. Sometimes she’s home alone for 20 minutes. You have to be practical.”\n\n In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on freephone 116 123, or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, you can call or text the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 988, chat on 988lifeline.org, or text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org\n\n Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nSmartphones\nSchools\nSocial media\nDigital media\nMental health\nHealth\nChildren\nfeatures\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/may/07/the-crux-of-all-evil-what-happened-to-the-first-city-that-tried-to-ban-smartphones-for-under-14s","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Amelia Gentleman","publishedAt":"2025-05-07T12:42:58.761Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
{"title":"Amazon makes ‘fundamental leap forward in robotics’ with device having sense of touch","content":"Amazon said it has made a “fundamental leap forward in robotics” after developing a robot with a sense of touch that will be capable of grabbing about three-quarters of the items in its vast warehouses.\n\nVulcan – which launches at the US firm’s “Delivering the Future” event in Dortmund, Germany, on Wednesday and is to be deployed around the world in the next few years – is designed to help humans sort items for storage and then prepare them for delivery as the latest in a suite of robots which have an ever-growing role in the online retailer’s extensive operation.\n\nAaron Parness, Amazon’s director of robotics, described Vulcan as a “fundamental leap forward in robotics. It’s not just seeing the world, it’s feeling it, enabling capabilities that were impossible for Amazon robots until now.”\n\n‘A fork in the road’: laundry-sorting robot spurs AI hopes and fears at Europe’s biggest tech event\nRead more\n\nThe robots will be able to identify objects by touch using AI to work out what they can and can’t handle and figuring out how best to pick them up. They will work alongside humans who now stash and retrieve items from shelving units which are manoeuvred to them at picking stations by wheeled robots – of which Amazon now has more than 750,000 in operation.\n\nVulcan will be able to stow items on the upper and lower levels of the shelving units – known as pods – so that humans no longer need to use ladders or bend so often during their work. Robots now operating in Amazon’s warehouse are able to shift items around or pick items using suction cups and computer vision.\n\nThe development is likely to raise fears of job losses as retailers reduce human involvement in distribution centres, which employ thousands of people.\n\nMany retailers have said that they are increasing investment in automation as labour costs rise around the world. Amazon has faced industrial action in the UK and elsewhere over low pay in its warehouses.\n\nEconomists at Goldman Sachs speculated in 2023 that 300m jobs worldwide could be automated out of existence by 2030 as a result of the development of generative AI, with many more roles radically transformed.\n\nIn the UK, between 60,000 and 275,000 jobs could be displaced every year over a couple of decades at the peak of the disruption, estimates from the Tony Blair Institute suggested last year.\n\nHowever, Tye Brady, the chief technologist of robotics at Amazon, said robots could not completely replace humans in the group’s warehouses and were there to “amplify the human potential” and to improve safety in the workplace. The self-confessed “Star Wars geek” said the robots he helps design could be likened to R2D2 as “an amazing collaborative robot”.\n\n“People will always be part of the equation,” he said, while machines will take on “the menial, the mundane and the repetitive” tasks.\n\n“There’s no such thing as completely automated. It just doesn’t exist, because you always need people to understand the value of the operation, just using common sense, like, is that really doing the job?”\n\nHe said having people involved could help protect against potential hacks of the system – as retailers increase efforts to protect themselves after the shutdown of Marks & Spencer’s online orders following a cyber-attack.\n\nskip past newsletter promotion\n\nSign up to Business Today\n\nFree daily newsletter\n\nGet set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning\n\nEnter your email address\nSign up\nPrivacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.\n\nafter newsletter promotion\n\n“All hacking could possibly be detected by a machine, but they’re usually detected by people, so having people be part of the equation is a good thing,” Brady said.\n\nHe added that humans are also best for spotting more prosaic problems, such as broken or spilt items in a delivery that could cause problems for the system.\n\nBrady says that AI is helping to develop robots that can navigate complex spaces autonomously and learn to move safely alongside people and other objects. He said the latest generation of robots were able to “ask for help” so that they could learn new ways of doing things.\n\n“It’s really exciting to bring both the mind and the body together,” he said. “It’s finally here, and it’s just beginning.”\n\nFor example, Amazon plans to install technology, which uses machine-learning and automation to create bespoke packaging that will cut waste. More than 70 of the machines will be installed in Germany, UK, France, Italy and Spain by the end of this year, with dozens more to follow by 2027.\n\nThe announcement comes as Amazon this week launched its low-cost Amazon Haul site in the UK, which promises thousands of products for £20 or less, as the group takes on cut-price operators Shein and Temu.\n\nExplore more on these topics\nRobots\nAmazon\nTechnology sector\nE-commerce\nInternet\nnews\nShare\nReuse this content","category":null,"sourceUrl":"https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/may/07/amazon-makes-fundamental-leap-forward-in-robotics-with-device-having-sense-of-touch","sourceLanguage":"EN","author":"Sarah Butler","publishedAt":"2025-05-07T12:43:00.456Z","imageUrl":"","source":"GUARDIAN","metadata":"{}"}
